
===== PAGE 1 =====
Humanitarian response in 
urban contexts
David Sanderson
Good Practice Review 12  	
Commissioned by


===== PAGE 2 =====
ii    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
About the author
Professor David Sanderson is the Inaugural Judith Neilson Chair in Architecture in the Faculty 
of the Built Environment at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia.
Humanitarian Policy Group
Overseas Development Institute
203 Blackfriars Road
London SE1 8NJ
United Kingdom
Tel. +44 (0) 20 7922 0300
Fax. +44 (0) 20 7922 0399
E-mail: hpgadmin@odi.org
Website: www.odi.org/hpg
© Overseas Development Institute, 2019
Readers are encouraged to quote or reproduce materials from this publication but, as 
copyright holders, ODI requests due acknowledgement and a copy of the publication. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Contents   |    iii
Contents
Acknowledgements	
v
Introduction	
viii
Chapter 1 Context	
001 
1.1 Ways of seeing the city	
001
1.2 Urban threats	
009
1.3 Forced displacement	
036
1.4 Vulnerability	
044
1.5 Urban actors	
048
Chapter 2 Themes and issues	
055
2.1 Coordination	
055
2.2 Corruption	
061
2.3 Urban resilience	
066
Chapter 3 Tools and approaches	
073
3.1 Frameworks, standards and alliances	
073
3.2 Area-based approaches	
079
3.3 Cash and markets 	
088
3.4 Geospatial analysis and mapping	
097
3.5 Context analysis	
107
3.6 Assessments and profiling	
112
3.7 Targeting	
118
3.8 Response analysis	
123
3.9 Design and management	
132
3.10 Monitoring and evaluation	
138
Chapter 4 Sectoral responses	
153
4.1 Housing, land and property (HLP) rights	
153
4.2 Shelter and settlements	
164
4.3 Debris and disaster waste management 	
174
4.4 Water, sanitation and hygiene	
179
4.5 Livelihoods	
192
4.6 Education	
198
4.7 Protection	
204
4.8 Health	
220
4.9 Food security	
228


===== PAGE 4 =====
iv    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts


===== PAGE 5 =====
Acknowledgements   |    v
Acknowledgements
I am extremely grateful to the following, without whom this Good Practice Review (GPR) would 
not have been possible. Leah Campbell (ALNAP) and Wendy Fenton (HPN) provided materials 
and reviewed and edited initial drafts. Thanks to Robin Fraiture for research support in gathering 
reports and case study materials, and to Sarah Bailey, Leah Campbell, Paul Currion, Neil Dillon, 
Paul Knox Clarke, Francine Menashy, Ronak Patel, Amelie Sundberg and Michael Talhami for 
providing specialist inputs to specific sections. Matthew Foley (ODI) edited the final text.
I am extremely grateful to the following reviewers: Patricia García Amado, Diane Archer, 
Natalie Brackett, Dean Brooks, Paul Currion, Neil Dillon, Alan Gundy, Giulia Frontini, Joanna 
Heil, Aynur Kadihasanoglu, Paul Knox Clarke, Tulio Mateo, Francine Menashy, Cristina 
Churruca Muguruza, Alice Obrecht, Chris Pain, Ronak Patel, Harriette Purchas, Sergio Regi, 
Aurelia Saint-Just, Pamela Sitko, Amelie Sundberg, Andrew Scott, Rolando Wallusche Saul, 
Kevin Savage and Michael Talhami.
Thanks also to the members of the project’s advisory group: Diane Archer, Anne Burlat, Paul 
Currion, Giulia Frontini, Shaun Hazeldine, Jerold S. Kayden, Heather McCloud, Ronak Patel, 
Samer Saliba, Aynur Kadihasanoglu, Suzanne Maguire, Brett Moore, Hariette Purchas, Anshu 
Sharma and Michael Talhami.
This document covers humanitarian aid activities implemented with the financial assistance 
of the European Union (EU Humanitarian Aid) through the International Rescue Committee 
(IRC). The views expressed herein should not be taken, in any way, to reflect the official 
opinion of the European Union, and the European Commission is not responsible for any use 
that may be made of the information it contains. 
This document is part of a series of learning products developed in partnership with the 
Global Alliance for Urban Crises. The Alliance, launched at the World Humanitarian Summit 
in 2016, is a global, multi-disciplinary and collaborative community of practice. It brings 
together officials from local government, built environment professionals, academics, 
humanitarian and development actors to work towards systemic change in the way we 
enable cities and urban communities to prevent, prepare for and respond to urban crisis. For 
more on the Alliance visit www.urbancrises.org.
Finally, we are grateful for the support of ALNAP members and the donors to the Humanitarian 
Policy Group (HPG)’s Integrated programme.


===== PAGE 6 =====
vi    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts


===== PAGE 7 =====
Chapter 1
Introduction    |    vii
Introduction
Just before the beginning of this decade, in around 2007, for the first time over half the 
planet’s population became urban. Today – at the end of the world’s first ‘urban decade’ 
– there are over 4.2 billion urban dwellers.1 By 2045, the prediction is that there will be six 
billion,2 with most growth taking place in Asia and Africa. 
There has also been a sharp rise in crises affecting cities over the past decade. Large-scale 
flooding has become a regular feature of many Asian cities, including Bangkok, Chennai and 
numerous towns in Pakistan. In 2010, the Haiti earthquake caused widespread damage in the 
capital, Port-au-Prince, and the following year a devastating tsunami struck coastal towns 
in Japan. Typhoon Haiyan, which tore through towns and cities in the Philippines in 2013, 
caused widespread devastation. Flooding and windstorms are being worsened by climate 
change, which is also increasing the severity of urban heatwaves, affecting cities’ poorest 
urban residents worst of all.3
After a period of decline, the number and severity of conflicts began to rise in 2011, causing 
widespread destruction and loss of life, notably in cities in Syria and Iraq. Elsewhere, in 
Mexico, Central America and sub-Saharan Africa, urban violence is on such a scale that its 
effects can be equivalent to – or even exceed – deaths caused by conflict.
One major consequence of these crises has been large-scale forced migration. According to 
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), a record 68.5 million people were forcibly 
displaced in 2017. Displacement is increasingly an urban phenomenon, with more and more 
displaced people seeking shelter and employment in towns and cities rather than camps.4 
Against this backdrop, the humanitarian sector is grappling with the challenges and 
opportunities of working in urban spaces. The Haiti earthquake was a wake-up call on 
the need to rethink humanitarian response to urban crises. Since then, a number of aid 
organisations (including UN agencies, donors, the Red Cross/Red Crescent Movement, NGOs, 
think tanks and consultants) have sought to ‘urbanise’ their approaches, recognising that 
many traditional ways of working derived largely from programming in rural areas need 
1	
 UNDESA, The 2018 Revision of World Urbanization Prospects (New York: UN, 2018) (https://www.un.org/
development/desa/publications/2018-revision-of-world-urbanization-prospects.html).
2	
 World Bank, ‘Urban Development’ (http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/urbandevelopment/overview).
3	
 The Future We Don’t Want: How Climate Change Could Impact the World’s Greatest Cities, UCCRN Technical Report 
(https://c40-production-images.s3.amazonaws.com/other_uploads/images/1789_Future_We_Don’t_Want_Report_1.4_
hi-res_120618.original.pdf).
4	
 IDMC, 2019 Global Report on Internal Displacement (Geneva: IDMC, forthcoming).


===== PAGE 8 =====
viii    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
revising, rethinking or replacing with tools better suited to urban contexts. However, for 
agencies used to working in rural environments, the dynamism of the city, with its reliance 
on markets and intricate logistics, can be a daunting challenge. Huge, diverse and mobile 
populations complicate needs assessments, and close coordination is necessary with other, 
often unfamiliar, actors. Extreme inequality makes sophisticated targeting essential. A 
patchwork of authorities and alternate, potentially predatory forms of urban governance 
require constant negotiation, which can disintegrate rapidly in the face of recurrent violence. 
These actors are not merely barriers to overcome, but key partners for engagement during 
any humanitarian response – whether neighbourhood committees, municipal governments 
or local community groups, they are often part of wider city ‘systems’, with extensive local 
knowledge and contacts, and often act as first responders long before the international 
community arrives. 
The humanitarian sector is beginning to recognise the scale and complexity of this challenge. 
Many organisations have taken steps to adapt their approaches to urban contexts, piloting 
new approaches and documenting and applying lessons learned, complementing a number 
of literature and policy reviews. But despite increasing recognition of the need to improve 
humanitarian responses in urban areas, most practitioners still lack practical guidance. To 
meet this need, the Humanitarian Practice Network (HPN) at ODI and the Active Learning 
Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action (ALNAP) commissioned 
this Good Practice Review (GPR) on responding to humanitarian needs in urban contexts. 
Reference guides for field-based practitioners, GPRs review operational experience of good 
practice in key areas, providing practical guidance for managers in designing, implementing 
and monitoring programmes.
Structure 
This GPR is structured into four chapters. Chapter 1, on context, sets the scene. It describes 
ways of seeing the city (there are many; this section presents three). The chapter then 
discusses four particular threats: naturally-triggered disasters, climate change, conflict and 
violence. The next sections look at urban displacement and vulnerability – cities are homes to 
extremes of wealth and poverty, and the poorest are almost always the most vulnerable. The 
chapter ends with a discussion of actors in the urban space associated with the humanitarian 
ecosystem.
Chapter 2, on themes and issues, comprises three sections. The first covers the complexities 
and challenges of coordination in urban areas. The next looks at corruption risks, both 
within urban institutions and structures and in aid programming itself. The chapter ends 
with a section on resilience, which is included given its importance in humanitarian efforts 
to reduce future risk, as well as figuring prominently in global agreements such as the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 


===== PAGE 9 =====
Introduction    |    ix
Chapter 3 focuses on tools and approaches. It begins by identifying key frameworks, 
standards and alliances relevant to urban humanitarian action. The next sections look at 
area-based approaches (ABAs), which have become popular in recent years as a people- and 
neighbourhood-centred approach to post-crisis recovery, and cash and markets, another 
increasingly common tool with obvious resonance and application in cities. The next section 
is on mapping and the geospatial visualisation of information. While maps have always been 
used in humanitarian planning and programming, recent developments in technology have 
made it a powerful instrument in fast-changing situations.
The following six sections follow the project management cycle, identifying and discussing 
urban-centric tools according to each stage. The first four sections relate to different forms 
of assessment. Context analysis refers to wider understandings of cities outside of the 
immediate crisis (for a better, more contextualised response); assessments and profiling 
gather information on which programming decisions are made, with profiling relating in 
particular to displacement as a result of conflict; targeting tools identify the most vulner-
able in a crisis, which in cities can be fraught with complexity; and response analysis 
concerns reviewing assessment information, and from that formulating the best response. 
The next section, on design and management, presents a range of approaches to navi-
gating the complex and fast-changing nature of many cities. The final section discusses 
the challenges of monitoring and evaluation in complex urban environments. 
Chapter 4, on sectors, is organised according to the current humanitarian architecture 
embodied in the Cluster approach. There are nine sections. The first, covering housing, 
land and property (HLP) rights, discusses the difficulties involved in addressing this issue in 
conflict, disaster and returnee situations, and the importance of land disputes as a common 
cause of conflict. Following this, the section on shelter and settlements emphasises the 
need to explore approaches beyond the provision of temporary structures. The section on 
debris and disaster waste management includes good practice in post-disaster clearance, 
explosive remnants of war and mine clearance. 
The next section focuses on water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), including water 
provision in informal settlements and the maintenance of services in conflict settings. 
The section on livelihoods discusses the critical need to support livelihood opportunities, 
particularly for forcibly displaced people. Education in emergencies is discussed, in 
particular in protracted crises. The section on protection emphasises the need to respect 
and uphold the rights of people caught up in crises, and identifies particular groups who 
may require protection. The next section, on health, returns to the theme of urban systems, 
with an emphasis on the inter-connected nature of health provision in cities. The final 
section looks at food security and the opportunities of using cash to meet urban food needs. 


===== PAGE 10 =====
x    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Research approach
The research for this GPR drew on reports, journals and academic papers for each section, 
as well as cross-cutting reports. Online searches were made using existing databases, 
online libraries and dedicated journals, and expert organisations and individuals were 
also contacted for sources and inputs, alongside an advisory committee of 16 members 
comprising experienced practitioners, consultants and academics. Each section was 
reviewed by between two to five reviewers, as well as ALNAP and ODI, and in some cases by 
subject experts. 
In an endeavour of this size there are inevitably challenges and limitations. The first 
challenge, and limitation, was the scope of the task: each section in this GPR could have 
been an entire publication in itself, and as much has been left out as has been included. 
The GPR has tried to cover what is essential and important, identifying and presenting 
principles, practices, evidence and examples of what has worked, while providing links to 
further reading. 
A second, related, challenge was identifying what to include within the scope of humanitarian 
action. For example, this GPR does not cover pre-crisis mitigation and preparedness actions 
(other GPRs, such as the one on disaster risk reduction (DRR), address this).5 
A third challenge lies in defining what we mean by ‘city’, and what distinguishes ‘urban’ 
from ‘rural’. As discussed later, for some urban researchers the very notion that there is an 
urban/rural divide is problematic, and comparisons provide little value – both are equally 
important areas of engagement, with their own equally important complexities. Finally, the 
pace of learning in urban humanitarian action is its own challenge, albeit a welcome one, 
with a number of major reports and research outputs due to be published during 2019. 
5	
 John Twigg, Disaster Risk Reduction, GPR 9 (revised edition) (London: ODI, 2015). 


===== PAGE 11 =====
Chapter 1
Context    |    001
Chapter 1
Context 
1.1 Ways of seeing the city
There are a number of ways of describing, defining and classifying a city.1 They include 
population density and size,2 infrastructure, range of economic activity and physical 
characteristics, the proportion of inhabitants engaged in non-agricultural activities, 
or a specific density of people to a particular area of land. An urban area may also be 
defined in relation to a particular administrative set-up. One UN report found that, ‘Of 
the 233 countries or areas for which estimates and projections of the urban and rural 
populations were produced, 125 use administrative criteria to distinguish between urban 
and rural areas’, while ‘Sixty-five of these countries use administrative designations as 
the sole criterion’. On population numbers, the report found that ‘the lower limit above 
which a settlement is considered urban varies considerably, ranging between 200 and 
50,000 inhabitants’.3 Recent research points out that the different ways in which ‘urban’ 
is understood lead to inaccurate generalisations (the world may be far more urbanised 
than is usually thought).4 There is also a view in critical urban studies going back nearly 
a century that the fundamental understanding that ‘urban’ and ‘rural’ are two different 
things is flawed, and that everything is urban (this is further discussed below).5 
1.1.1 Three ways of describing the city
This section presents three interrelated and overlapping ways of describing the city: 
the physical city; the city as a series of systems; and the people-centred city. These 
are emphasised here because they form the basis of much of the subsequent content 
presented in this Good Practice Review. 
1	
This review uses the term ‘city’ to refer to urban settlements, including cities, towns and peri-urban areas’ 
2	
In some countries, a place is ‘urban’ if it has population of 2,000 or more and provides amenities and facilities 
which indicate modern living, i.e. a combination of commercial, industrial, residential and other urban land use 
functions, such as health and educational facilities, restaurants, banks and police stations.
3	
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, World Urbanization Prospects: 2014 Revision 
(New York: UN) (https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/publications/files/wup2014-report.pdf).
4	
Gregory Scruggs, ‘“Everything We’ve Heard about Global Urbanization Turns Out to be Wrong” – Researchers’, 
Thomson Reuters Foundation, 12 July 2018 (http://news.trust.org/item/20180712130016-lwnc2/%20and%20https://
ghsl.jrc.ec.europa.eu/degurba.php).
5	
See for example the extensive writings of Neil Brenner and Christian Schmid at the Harvard Urban Lab: 
http://www.urbantheorylab.net/.
Chapter 1


===== PAGE 12 =====
002    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
1. The physical city
The physical manifestation of the city is perhaps what people think of first when thinking 
about what a city is. Thinking about physicality introduces words into humanitarian action 
that may not be often used, such as density, space, buildings, infrastructure, squares and 
streets. The physical city also reveals stark differences between wealth and poverty (and 
therefore the underlying vulnerability of many poorer urban dwellers). The physical city can 
be described in terms of:
•	
A variety of building types and uses, with high densities and verticality and a wide 
range of functions, including industry, commerce and education.
•	
A location for businesses (both formal and informal), commerce and government.  
•	
Infrastructure, such as water and sewage systems.
•	
Public spaces such as parks, sports halls and exhibition venues.
•	
Informal settlements, which in many cities are home to large numbers of people, 
often with complex land arrangements (see Section 4.5).
•	
Transport networks such as rivers and canals, motorways, public transport and 
thoroughfares. 
•	
Large-scale infrastructure such as airports and power stations. 
•	
Historical landmarks and culturally important spaces.
The physical city also relates to a city’s location, whether coastal, landlocked or in 
mountainous terrain. Urban locations of course are significant in terms of susceptibility to 
naturally-triggered disasters (see Section 1.2.3) and climate change (Section 1.2.4). A physical 
understanding of the city is the basis for land planning laws, administrative boundaries and 
municipal expenditures. Several aspects of urban humanitarian programming have a strong 
link to a city’s physical attributes, including area-based approaches, geospatial analysis 
(mapping) and infrastructure provision, such as debris management, shelter and WASH. 
A physical description of a city, however, has its limitations. For example (if discounting 
administrative boundaries), deciding where a city stops, and where the countryside begins, 
is not straightforward. The traditional concept of the city as a physical space within rural 
surroundings is also eroding and being replaced by much more complex and inter-connected 
human settlements (mega-cities, metropolitan regions, a ‘rural–urban continuum’ or city 
‘clusters’). Suburbs can be ‘outer cities’ connected to multiple urban centres. Many informal 
settlements grow into self-organised areas, known variously around the world as favelas, 
shanty towns, urban villages and banlieues.


===== PAGE 13 =====
Chapter 1
Context     |    003
2. The city as a series of systems
A systems-based approach describes how different elements, aspects or functions of a city 
work together. Systems can be defined as ‘an interconnected collection of things (for example 
people, institutions, infrastructure, societal norms, economy or ecosystems), organised 
in a pattern or structure that changes frequently’.6 Systems here are used to describe how 
different elements, aspects or functions combine. An example would be financial markets 
or healthcare, which in a city might include hospitals, ambulances, health infrastructure, 
medical supply industries, pharmaceuticals, doctors, nurses and support staff. A systems 
approach also makes the links, and arguably helpfully blurs the lines, between ‘urban’ and 
‘rural’ areas – for example a market system concerning the consumption of fish involves 
catching fish in the sea, processing them and transporting them from what may be coastal 
rural areas to the city.
Systems thinking cuts across disciplines and is increasingly being used to describe and 
understand the complex processes by which people live their lives in society. Systems-
based thinking forces consideration of the links between and within different components 
of the city. This may challenge existing ways of working for humanitarian actors, where 
single-sector delivery may be the norm (see for example Section 3.6 on multi-sectoral 
assessments). A focus on systems also highlights the complexities of urban humanitarian 
action, and underpins the approaches and issues described in a number of sections of this 
review, including governance, corruption, violence and the role of cash programming and its 
relation to markets.
There are a number of different ways of describing urban systems. UN-Habitat describes 
urban systems in terms of five attributes: space, organisations (such as neighbourhood 
groups and other associations), physicality (including buildings and infrastructure), 
functions (described as commercial, governance and social processes) and time (noting that 
cities change over months, years and centuries).7 
Figure 1.1, from ALNAP, presents five interlinked systems. From which, the following might 
be noted.
Infrastructure, services, space and settlements relate to the physical city, described above. 
Redundancy and flexibility of physical systems are extremely important. Systems should 
be built in such a way that they are safe to fail, i.e. will cause minimal harm in the event of 
a disaster. 
6	
 E. Levine, Strategic Resilience Assessment Guidelines (Portland, OR: Mercy Corps, 2017) (https://reliefweb.int/
report/world/stress-strategic-resilience-assessment-guidelines-document), p. 5.
7	
 For a further description, see UN-Habitat, City Resilience Profiling Tool (http://urbanresiliencehub.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/02/CRPT-Guide.pdf).
Chapter 1


===== PAGE 14 =====
004    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Politics and governance relates to how power is exercised in cities. Governance concerns how 
goods, resources, people and power are organised, which can have positive and negative 
outcomes for how people live their lives in cities. Governance is sometimes confused with 
government, but constitutes a much wider set of structures, entities and relationships. 
Governance includes:
•	
Formal power structures, such as municipal government and neighbourhood 
organisations.
•	
Laws and regulations.
•	
Law enforcement bodies, such as the police and civil defence.
•	
Other power structures, such as gangs and organised crime. 
•	
Legal and cultural norms.
Figure 1.1 Five urban systems
Source: L. Campbell, Stepping Back: Understanding Cities and Their Systems, ALNAP Working Paper (London: ALNAP/
ODI, 2016) (www.alnap.org/help-library/stepping-back-understanding-cities-and-their-systems).
Economy 
and 
livelihoods
Politics and 
governance
Social and 
cultural
Space and 
settlements
Infrastructure 
and services


===== PAGE 15 =====
Context    |    005
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
The quality of governance is directly linked to disasters and conflict. Governance failures 
(such as unresolved disputes) can lead to conflict, while weak governance does little to quell 
violence (further discussed in Section 1.2.2). High levels of corruption underpin vulnerability 
and exacerbate the effects of naturally-triggered disasters (Section 1.2.3). 
Economy and livelihoods relates to:
•	
Income generation through formal and informal employment.
•	
Production, consumption and supply chains.
•	
The formal and informal economy.
•	
Markets.
•	
Human capital – the skills and abilities people possess and/or develop.
•	
Land values.
•	
Taxes and municipal revenue generation.
•	
Private sector companies and trades.
Culture and society describes how people live, work, engage and interact with one another. 
It includes:
•	
Social networks, including networks of cooperation, reciprocity and trust. 
•	
Combinations of different social and ethnic groups, e.g. tribal affiliations, caste 
groups and groups from a particular heritage or culture.
•	
Collective and shared histories.
•	
Belief systems and religions.
3. The people-centred city   
A people-centred approach emphasises the central belief and motivation of humanitarian 
action, which concerns providing help to the most vulnerable. The people-centred approach 
is used throughout this Good Practice Review as the basis for understanding what drives 
good practice, and is reflected in a number of sections relating to project management, such 
as assessments, profiling, response analysis and area-based approaches (each of which is 
discussed later).
Cities are homes to billions of people, with competing and similar interests, and differences 
in wealth and poverty and in their ability to meet their needs and realise their ambitions. A 
focus on people is vital for all humanitarian operations, and is something that can become 


===== PAGE 16 =====
006    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Figure 1.2 The people-centred city
Source: D. Sanderson, Integrating Development and Disaster Management Concepts to Reduce Vulnerability in Low Income Urban Settlements, PhD Thesis, Oxford Brookes University, 
Oxford. Cited in ALNAP, Responding to Urban Disasters (London: ALNAP, 2009) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/responding-to-urban-disasters).
For example 
water, 
land, 
education,
electricity, 
services
Basic needs
For example 
food, 
water, 
warmth, 
security
Meet
Build
Social
Human
Political
Financial
Physical
Natural
Cultural
Discrimination
Helps or hinders access
Resources
Controls
Access
People
Assets
Threats
Shocks and 
stresses
Barrier


===== PAGE 17 =====
Context    |    007
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
quickly lost.8 Good urban programming remembers that dignity is an essential element, 
and that humanitarian action is, as noted above, about assisting affected people in times of 
crises. IFRC9 describes the people-centred approach as ‘listening to and understanding what 
people think at all times, rather than imposing ideas or projects on them’.  
The model in Figure 1.2 describes people’s lives and livelihoods: how they access resources 
(and what gets in the way); how resources are controlled; and how they use resources to 
meet basic needs and build assets to withstand threats, including shocks (such as rapid-
onset disasters) and stresses (such as escalating violence).
From this model the following might be noted.
Assets are key to reducing vulnerability to external threats. Assets, and how people access, 
manage, keep control of and trade them, is a central aspect of how people live. Asset 
types include: 
•	
Physical (belongings, land, a property).
•	
Economic (money, jobs and opportunities).
•	
Social (including friendships and relationships, connectedness).
•	
Human (for example knowledge, skills and abilities).
•	
Political (the organisation of power, such as community groups, slum groups or 
political parties).
•	
Natural (land, water and the functioning of ecosystems).
•	
Cultural (including monuments, shrines and historically important structures and 
locations). 
Assets play a key role in people’s vulnerability and capacity – broadly speaking, the stronger 
their assets, the less vulnerable people are likely to be to external threats. The use of 
assets by people in development and in vulnerability reduction is well documented.10 This 
8	
 A compelling study relating to this is M. Anderson, D. Brown and J. Isabella, Time to Listen: Hearing People on the 
Receiving End of International Aid (Cambridge, MA: CDA Collaborative Learning Projects, 2012) (https://www.
cdacollaborative.org/publication/time-to-listen-hearing-people-on-the-receiving-end-of-international-aid/). The 
researchers asked over 6,000 people from across the world of their experiences of humanitarian aid after disaster. 
Among other things, the study found that ‘Very few people call for more aid; virtually everyone says they want 
“smarter” aid. Many feel that too much is given too fast’ (p. 2).
9	
 IFRC, Roadmap to Community Resilience (Geneva: IFRC, 2016) (https://media.ifrc.org/ifrc/wp-content/uploads/
sites/5/2018/03/1310403-Road-Map-to-Community-Resilience-Final-Version_EN-08.pdf).
10	  C. Moser, Assets, Livelihoods and Social Policy, paper delivered at the Arusha Conference on ‘New Frontiers of Social 
Policy’, 12–15 December 2005 (https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/438f/3192022273fc7d056e8e52bafe5974cc270a.pdf).


===== PAGE 18 =====
008    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
includes social assets, especially among low-income urban neighbourhoods, for borrowing 
and loaning money,11 and more widely within post-disaster recovery – it’s often your 
neighbours who pull you out of the rubble (see Section 1.5 on emergent groups). Belonging 
to a particular ethnic group can also make people more or less vulnerable, depending on 
the circumstances. Assets therefore act as the ‘buffer’ between people and sudden-onset 
disasters (shocks), or slow-burning stresses (for example an illness that, without access to 
proper treatment, can prove life-threatening). Assets are key to living in the city: having 
assets enables people to access resources, such as education, healthcare, food and 
markets. It therefore follows that those with fewer assets have less access to resources. 
There are different types of community in the city. While traditionally ‘community’ was often 
synonymous with a fixed location, such as a village or neighbourhood, the term has wider 
application in the city. Communities can be linked by non-physical connections. Recent 
research12 identifies six typologies of urban communities: 
•	
Communities of interest, which form around a common issue or concern.
•	
Communities of culture, where people share a common language, values or faith.
•	
Communities of resistance, where people coalesce around a shared negative 
experience, such as forced migration.
•	
Communities of place – people with a common spatial connection, for instance living 
on the same street.
•	
Communities of practice, such as a common livelihood.
•	
Virtual communities – people connected through social media.
Discrimination hinders access, for example belonging to a marginalised group, a minority 
faith-based group or LGBTQ+ people (see Section 4.7 on protection). Refugees living in cities 
and those who may be internally displaced regularly face discrimination (see Section 1.3 on 
displacement). People who are most vulnerable are also routinely discriminated against (see 
Section 1.4 on vulnerability). 
Threats are described as shocks (rapid-onset events, such as earthquakes, fires or floods) 
and stresses which, while being less ‘rapid’, may be no less damaging. Stresses may include 
escalating violence or worsening climate change-induced heatwaves. Threats are discussed 
further in the sections that follow.
11	  Strong social assets are the basis for savings and loans schemes popularised by the Grameen Bank and others.
12	  Adapted from L. Campbell, Working with People and Communities in Urban Humanitarian Crises, ALNAP Working 
Paper (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2017) (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/alnap-urban-
people-and-communities-2017.pdf).


===== PAGE 19 =====
Context    |    009
Chapter 1
Resources within the city are controlled. This might be land controlled by the authorities, 
jobs controlled by private sector organisations or services such as water and electricity 
controlled by service providers. Control of neighbourhoods might be in the hands of gangs 
or organised crime (see Section 1.2.2 on urban violence). 
In summary, therefore, for many the very notion and understanding of cities is complex, 
contested and confusing. As regards humanitarian action, this section has sought to 
introduce and emphasise a number of key points (which form the basis of the rest of this Good 
Practice Review). The first is that the humanitarian principle of helping the most vulnerable 
is equally essential for urban areas as elsewhere – a people-centred approach steers limited 
humanitarian efforts to those who need help the most. Within this, understandings of 
who is most vulnerable may be nuanced and not immediately obvious (see Section 3.6 on 
assessments for further discussion). 
A second key point is complexity. Activities, services and livelihoods do not take place in 
isolation. Almost everything is linked to something else, and often has a knock-on effect. In 
this regard, a systems approach helps to identify, and increase understanding of, some of the 
links and overlaps that shape how people live. 
A third point is that cities are home to complex levels and understandings of different forms 
of power held by different groups, ranging from formal governance structures (such as levels 
of government) to ‘informal’ groups, such as gangs (see Section 1.5 on urban actors). As with 
the other points, effective humanitarian action seeks to understand and work with power, 
while recognising how complicated that is.
1.2 Urban threats
1.2.1 Armed conflict 
Cities throughout history have been closely linked to armed conflict. As the locations of 
elites and power, they have attracted invaders and those seeking to wrest power and wealth 
from their incumbents. Cities have also been places of safety during times of war – think 
of the ramparts of ancient Middle Eastern and European cities, designed to keep invaders 
out and those inside safe. Cities can also concentrate conflict, leading to higher numbers 
of deaths than in other areas. Research by the International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC) has found that, between March 2017 and July 2018, in four governorates of Iraq and 
Syria ‘Urban offensives account[ed] for eight times more conflict-related civilian fatalities … 
than ongoing fighting or fighting in other areas’.13
13	  ICRC, New Research Shows Urban Warfare Eight Times More Deadly for Civilians in Syria and Iraq (Geneva: ICRC, 2018) 
(https://www.icrc.org/en/document/new-research-shows-urban-warfare-eight-times-more-deadly-civilians-syria-iraq).
Chapter 1


===== PAGE 20 =====
010    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
This section defines armed conflict; discusses conflict and critical urban infrastructure; 
outlines the factors and choices influencing interventions in urban armed conflict settings; 
and identifies issues relating to working with local actors. 
Defining armed conflict
Armed conflict can be defined as ‘a political  conflict  in which  armed  combat involves 
the armed forces of at least one state (or one or more armed factions seeking to gain control 
of all or part of the state), and in which at least 1,000 people have been killed by the fighting 
during the course of the  conflict’.14 International Humanitarian Law (IHL) recognises 
two types of armed conflict:15 international armed conflict between two or more states; 
and non-international armed conflict between government forces and non-governmental 
armed groups. 
Following decades of decline in the number and scale of conflicts around the world, since 
2011 that trend has reversed.16 By 2017, there were 27 ongoing major armed conflicts; 52 
new conflicts emerged between 2011 and 2017, 46 of which were in the Middle East. Conflict 
is increasingly affecting civilians. According to the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre 
(IDMC), for example, ‘The number of new displacements associated with conflict and 
violence almost doubled, from 6.9 million in 2016 to 11.8 million in 2017. Syria, DRC and Iraq 
together accounted for more than half of the global figure’.17 According to IDMC estimates, 
40 million people were internally displaced by conflict at the end 2017.
Cities and conflict
The ICRC identifies a number of underlying vulnerabilities which make urban contexts 
particularly prone to conflict. They include:
•	
The fragility and scale of services, such as power and water supplies. The disruption of 
one water supply by conflict can leave large numbers of people with no coverage.
•	
Dependence on municipal services or private bodies, for example for water, 
sanitation, electricity. When these services are lost or damaged, people may not be 
able to fix them themselves.
14	  ‘Defining Armed Conflict’, undated (http://ploughshares.ca/armed-conflict/defining-armed-conflict/).
15	 ICRC, How Is the Term ‘Armed Conflict’ Defined in International Humanitarian Law?, ICRC Opinion Paper, March 2008 
(https://www.icrc.org/en/doc/assets/files/other/opinion-paper-armed-conflict.pdf).
16	 M. Marshall and G. Elzinga-Marshall, Conflict, Governance, and State Fragility Global Report (Vienna, VA: Center for 
Systemic Peace, 2017) ( http://www.systemicpeace.org/vlibrary/GlobalReport2017.pdf).
17	 IDMC, Global Report on Internal Displacement (Geneva: IDMC, 2018) (http://www.internal-displacement.org/global-
report/grid2018/).


===== PAGE 21 =====
Context    |    011
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
•	
The complexity of urban services. For example, a hospital relies on expert staff, 
complex IT systems and equipment.
•	
Unequal distribution of services, for instance between formal and informal services.
•	
Population movements into cities, which can increase the pressure on services. 
•	
Existing urban stresses, such as violence, gang activity and weak governance. 
•	
The density and diversity of communities and authorities, increasing the likelihood of 
political, sectarian or tribal conflict, or conflicts with the authorities.
Critical infrastructure
As the ICRC notes, ‘The complex, interconnected systems that provide water, electrical and 
sanitation services essential to urban health are often among the first to fall victim to urban 
warfare’.18 Figure 1.3 identifies critical urban services that may be at risk during armed conflict.
The impact of conflict on urban services can be direct (such as infrastructure being  target-
ed), indirect (where services are damaged by conflict targeted elsewhere) and cumulative
(effects over time; for instance, services may worsen or degrade)Table 1.1 identifies 
each of these impacts in relation to critical individuals, hardware, consumables and the 
general public.


18	  ICRC, ‘I Saw My City Die’: Voices from the Front Lines of Urban Conflict in Iraq, Syria and Yemen (Geneva: ICRC, 2017) 
(https://www.icrc.org/en/document/iraq-syria-and-yemen-five-times-more-civilians-die-city-offensives-new-report-
finds), p. 18.
Vulnerability
Time period
Population
City estimate
Extreme heat
Present day
Over 200 million people 
Over 350 cities
2050s 
Over 1.6 billion people 
Over 970 cities
Extreme heat 
and poverty
Present day 
Over 26 million people 
Over 230 cities
2050s 
Nearly 215 million people 
Over 490 cities
Water availability
2050s
Over 650 million people 
Over 500 cities
Food security
2050s
Over 2.5 billion people 
Over 1,600 cities
Sea level rise
2050s 
Over 800 million people 
Over 570 cities
Sea level rise and 
power plants
2050s 
Over 450 million people 
Over 230 cities
Table 1.1 The effects of climate change: summary of global numbers
Source: The Future We Don’t Want: How Climate Change Could Impact the World’s Greatest Cities, UCCRN Technical 
Report (https://c40-production-images.s3.amazonaws.com/other_uploads/images/1789_Future_We_Don’t_Want 
Report_1.4_hi-res_120618.original.pdf).


===== PAGE 22 =====
012    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Pumping station
Pumping 
station
Informal 
settlement
Water
Electrical 
power plant
Water treatment plant
Water treatment plant
Hospital
Figure 1.3 Critical urban services
Direct impact can lead to cumulative impact. For example, in relation to public health, a 
relatively short disruption to a supply of drinking water (for a day or a few days) ‘can greatly 
increase the probability of infection from diseases already present in the environment if 
the quality of the service was originally reliable’.19 Disease risks may increase if conflict 
drives more people and more disease strains into urban areas, ‘particularly when the 
19	  H. L. Risebro et al., ‘Contaminated Small Drinking Water Supplies and Risk of Infectious Intestinal Disease: A 
Prospective Cohort Study’, PLoS One Special Issue, 2012, citing M. A. Al-Ghamdi et al., ‘Environmental Risk Factors for 
Diarrhoea among Male Schoolchildren in Jeddah City, Saudi Arabia’, Journal of Water and Health 7, 2009.
Source: ICRC, Urban Services during Protracted Armed Conflict: A Call for a Better Approach to Assisting Affected People 
(Geneva: ICRC, 2015) (https://www.icrc.org/sites/default/files/topic/file_plus_list/4249_urban_services_during_


===== PAGE 23 =====
Context    |    013
Chapter 1
Road, rail, logistics
Electronic transfer
Finance
Interdependence between 
urban centres
Distant urban center
Distant political center
Agriculture
Chapter 1
protracted_armed_conflict.pdf). A video produced by the ICRC exploring critical urban services can be found at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eVCkzbZiYRw.
movements of people are coupled with poor general treatment of water and wastewater, 
and incomplete immunization campaigns’.20
Interventions in urban conflict
Given the nature of armed conflict, where infrastructure, people, services and humanitarian 
aid providers themselves may well be targets, the factors and choices influencing aid 
interventions are more complex than in non-conflict settings. Reflecting on humanitarian 
action in Syria, Francois Grünewald argues that:
20	  Ibid.


===== PAGE 24 =====
014    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
To effectively support conflict-affected people in Syrian cities means working in very 
complex, volatile, unpredictable and dangerous environments. Humanitarian agencies 
have to be agile, flexible, opportunistic and risk-taking. Classic operational modalities 
imposed by donor procedures or guidelines, which require lengthy planning, standardised 
operational modalities and sophisticated accountability mechanisms, are of limited use in 
these highly volatile and complex urban contexts.21
The ICRC recommends that, in urban conflict operations, the following factors need to 
be considered in determining what may be achievable in an urban armed conflict setting:
•	
The scale of the challenge. Restoring damaged infrastructure in large cities has the 
potential to benefit thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands, of people. However, 
this is often too costly for humanitarian agencies focused on traditional emergency 
response.
•	
The duration of the challenge, which may be months or years in protracted conflict.
•	
The interconnected nature of essential services (see above).
•	
The fact that ‘urban’ extends beyond a city’s formal boundaries; distant active 
combat can affect essential urban services (e.g. supply routes, water and wastewater 
treatment plants, supplies of food or other commodities).
•	
The cumulative and indirect impacts of conflict, as well as the direct ones.
•	
The complex political context in a highly securitised operating environment.
•	
Gaps in evidence and analysis.
•	
The challenges arising from lack of respect for IHL.
•	
Funding that may not match the duration or scale of the needs.
Working with local actors
Grünewald’s review of working with local actors in urban Syria underscores the need for 
inclusion, clarity of purpose and the ability to negotiate:
Effective humanitarian response in conflict-affected urban areas in Syria requires a 
capacity to engage in strategic dialogue, firmly rooted in humanitarian principles, 
with a wide range of actors, including the government, political/religious factions and 
associated armed militias and what remains of municipal institutions. Such negotiations 
demand language and negotiation skills, a thorough understanding of both the urban and 
21	  F. Grünewald, ‘Cities in Conflict: The Lessons of Syria’, Humanitarian Exchange 59, 2013 (https://odihpn.org/
wp-content/uploads/2013/11/HE_59_web.pdf).


===== PAGE 25 =====
Context    |    015
Chapter 1
underlying socio-political context, the networks to facilitate the necessary connections 
and a willingness to accept relatively high levels of risk.22
Due to the complexity of many urban areas, exacerbated during armed conflict, the 
relationships implementing organisations have with key actors is highly important (see also 
Section 1.5 on urban actors and 2.1 on coordination). Key points include:
•	
Strong, long-term partnerships are vital, particularly with the municipal and central 
government structures that are usually responsible for urban services. However, in 
conflict situations they may not always be possible partners, for reasons of political 
bias towards one side in a conflict, or corruption (this is discussed further in Section 
2.2 on corruption).
•	
High staff turnover often means that relations need to be constantly made and 
remade if operations are to function effectively. 
•	
Private sector organisations such as contractors may often be needed, in particular 
where in-house expertise within municipalities is missing.
1.2.2 Violence 
Violence can be defined as ‘the intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or 
actual, against oneself, another person, or against a group or community, that either results 
22	  Ibid.
Chapter 1
Box 1.1 Locally-driven response in Aleppo: the Conflict, Security and 
Safety Fund (CSSF) project 
An initiative in conflict-affected Tamkeen in Aleppo (which at the time was in a 
non-government-held area) supports local actors to prioritise and manage local 
services. The project involves participatory activities geared towards setting up 
local committees that manage budgets and plans for service delivery such as health, 
education, food and infrastructure. A review of the project concluded that it illustrates 
a way to engage with local governance bodies’ using remote management’, where 
‘priority interventions were outlined by the communities themselves. Here, most of 
the communities opted for basic services, infrastructure and development rather than 
humanitarian aid in the form of food, shelter or emergency health services’.
Source: S. Dadu-Brown and A. Dadu, Strengthening Local Councils to Bridge the Aid Gap in Aleppo, IIED Briefing, 
January 2018 (http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/17449IIED.pdf).


===== PAGE 26 =====
016    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, maldevelop-
ment, or deprivation’.23 Violence has traditionally not been considered a humanitarian 
priority, with the focus traditionally on the consequences of disasters and conflict. 
However, given the scale of destruction in a number of cities around the world, and given 
the humanitarian mandate to help people affected by acute shocks, an increasing number 
of humanitarian agencies, donors and think tanks are tackling urban violence. 
23	  Violence Prevention Alliance, ‘Definition and Typology of Violence’ (https://www.who.int/violenceprevention/
approach/definition/en/).
Box 1.2 ICRC’s recommendations concerning urban conflict 
ICRC’s authoritative 2017 report I Saw My City Die, concerning armed conflict in Iraq, 
Syria and Yemen, provides ten recommendations, of which the following are relevant to 
actors responding to emergencies:
•	
Parties to the conflict and the international community should refrain from 
displacing people and respect the rights and address the needs of those displaced 
within their countries.
•	
Authorities and the international community should protect and assist refugees 
from these conflicts.
•	
Authorities, parties to the conflict and the international community should do 
much more to ensure that essential service providers and humanitarian workers 
are protected.
•	
Authorities, humanitarian actors and the international community should invest 
more in ensuring that victims of violence have access to appropriate psychosocial 
and mental health support services.
•	
Authorities, humanitarian actors and the international community should help 
rebuild communities, not just infrastructure. Cities are made up of people, not just 
buildings. 
These recommendations point to the need for humanitarian practitioners, among other 
things, to retain where feasible a neighbourhood-based approach (discussed in Section 
3.2); prioritise protection both for affected populations and service providers (see 
Section 4.7); and prioritise a people-centred approach.
See ICRC, ‘I Saw My City Die’: Voices from the Front Lines of Urban Conflict in Iraq, Syria and Yemen (Geneva: ICRC, 2017) 
(https://www.icrc.org/en/document/iraq-syria-and-yemen-five-times-more-civilians-die-city-offensives-new-
report-finds). ICRC also maintains a valuable website, ‘War in Cities’, which can be found at https://www.icrc.org/en/
war-in-cities.


===== PAGE 27 =====
Context    |    017
Chapter 1
This section describes the scale of the issue. It presents the drivers of urban violence, 
including interpersonal and gender-based violence (GBV), discusses gangs and violence and 
explores the relationship between violence and naturally-triggered disasters. The section 
includes an abridged version of an article describing humanitarian action on urban violence 
in Central American cities.
The scale of the issue
The consequences of violence are enormous. More people die from violence (globally 
some 4,200 every day) than from naturally-triggered disasters or conflict. According to one 
estimate, violence kills around half a million people a year.24 Between 2007 and 2012, almost 
40,000 drug-related deaths were reported in Mexico.25 Violence and crime is thought to 
cost Latin American and Caribbean countries between 2.4% and 3.6% of their GDP. Urban 
violence in Latin America displaces more people than declared conflicts and war.
The impact of violence on urban life has prompted a number of agencies to consider it 
within humanitarian practice. The ICRC states that ‘the destructive force of urban violence 
on people’s lives and livelihoods – and the suffering it causes – is a major concern of the ICRC 
in many contexts in which it works around the world. This violence – often symptomatic 
of socio-economic pressures linked to rapid urbanization, soaring population growth and 
large population movements – will be one of the defining features, and key challenges, 
of the twenty-first century’.26 Similarly, MSF has expanded its work in what have been 
termed ‘other situations of violence’. The 2006 Geneva Declaration acknowledged that 
armed violence ‘prevents humanitarian assistance from reaching people in need’, and 
commits signatories to ‘integrate armed violence reduction programmes into humanitarian 
assistance, emergency and crisis management initiatives’. Some researchers have equated 
urban violence with an emerging form of warfare, where ‘Chronically violent cities … 
[comprise] a “new” kind of armed conflict with grave implications for humanitarian action 
and human welfare. These and other urban centres are experiencing a variation of warfare, 
often in densely populated slums and shantytowns’.27  
24  ICRC, Urban Violence and the ICRC’s Humanitarian Response (Geneva: ICRC, 2016) (https://www.icrc.org/en/
document/urban-violence-and-icrc-humanitarian-response).
25	  E. Ferris, ‘Protecting People in Cities: The Disturbing Case of Haiti’, Disasters 36(1), July (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2012.01285.x).
26	  ICRC, Urban Violence and the ICRC’s Humanitarian Response (Geneva: ICRC, 2016) (https://www.icrc.org/en/
document/urban-violence-and-icrc-humanitarian-response).
27	  R. Muggah and K. Savage, ‘Urban Violence and Humanitarian Action: Engaging the Fragile City’, Journal of 
Humanitarian Assistance, January 2012 (https://sites.tufts.edu/jha/archives/1524).
Chapter 1


===== PAGE 28 =====
018    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Drivers of urban violence 
Reviewing the drivers of extreme urban violence, one investigation28 identifies a collection 
of risk factors, including income and social inequality, rapid urban growth with poor 
development and access to basic services, an unemployed youth bulge and weak police 
and justice mechanisms that allow urban violence to prosper. Other research29 analyses 
how violence in urban areas spreads and tips over into wider city-level violence. The same 
investigation found three key areas for stemming the spread of violence: improving low-
income informal settlements, strengthening governance structures and reducing inequality. 
Social cohesion and building social networks, inclusion and citizen participation, alongside 
social protection programmes, were also key opportunities for reducing violence. 
An ALNAP lessons paper30 on urban violence identifies the following urban-specific challenges:
•	
A persistent culture of violence can reduce collective action and erode collective 
social capital, leading to more alienation. 
•	
Density can concentrate violence, leading for example to high murder rates in 
relatively small urban areas such as low-income settlements. 
•	
Access to services by humanitarian organisations and others can be restricted, for 
instance for security and safety reasons or because organised gangs may block access.
•	
Complex urban living conditions, including ‘predatory authorities, front-lines, 
opportunities for criminal gains, alternate forms of urban governance in slums, the 
need to negotiate access to very localized areas with a number of different actors 
along with urban chaos and structural dysfunctions’.
•	
Education for children and teenagers can be affected, leading to diminished life 
opportunities. 
A number of other research initiatives in this area are under way. The Igarapé Institute’s 
project on Humanitarian Action in Situations Other than War (HASOW) ‘has as its central 
aim the empirical examination of the dynamics of urban violence and the changing face 
of humanitarian action’. HASOW comprises research on a number of themes and issues, 
including the impacts of violence on health and organised gangs and violence. HASOW can 
be found at https://igarape.org.br/en/issues/safer-cities/hasow/.
28	  J. DeBoer, R. Muggah and R. Patel, Conceptualizing City Fragility and Resilience (Tokyo: UNU, 2016) (https://cpr.unu.
edu/conceptualizing-city-fragility-and-resilience.html).
29	  C. Moser and D. Rodgers, Understanding the Tipping Point of Conflict, Working Paper 7 (Manchester: University of 
Manchester, 2012) (http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTGOVACC/Resources/GlobalPolicyReport.pdf).
30	  E. Lucchi, Humanitarian Interventions in Situations of Urban Violence (London: ALNAP, 2013) (https://www.alnap.org/
help-library/alnap-lessons-paper-humanitarian-interventions-in-settings-of-urban-violence).


===== PAGE 29 =====
Context    |    019
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
Box 1.3 is an abridged version of an article by Robert Muggah, co-founder of the Igarapé 
Institute. It discusses the scale of urban violence in central American cities, and the 
humanitarian activities currently under way in response by a number of agencies. 
Finally, aid organisations have typically started small, built to scale and then handed over 
their pilots to government or local non-governmental counterparts. Notwithstanding the 
temptation to undertake large-scale programmes in fragile cities, relief organisations are 
proceeding with caution. There are meaningful ways to scale up city-based interventions, 
but only if these are properly aligned with formal and informal delivery providers, with 
stable resourcing and political investment. To be effective, aid agencies need to keep an 
open mind, take risks and invest heavily in partnerships from the start.
Box 1.3 Humanitarian responses to violence in Central America’s 
fragile cities 
The countries and cities of the so-called Northern Triangle of Central America – El 
Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras – have some of the world’s highest rates of violent 
deaths, with murder rates exceeding those of Afghanistan or Syria. The violence 
in Central America is propelled by a volatile combination of transnational gangs, 
drug-trafficking and weak law enforcement. Rival factions run extortion rackets and 
assassins for hire, and recruit heavily from poorer neighbourhoods and shanty-towns 
throughout the region. Most gangs are involved in extortion, protection rackets and 
drug transhipment and retail.
Some humanitarian agencies have launched interventions in the region. For more 
than half a decade, the ICRC has been quietly testing new programmes to protect 
civilians and facilitate better access to basic services in San Salvador, Tegucigalpa in 
Honduras and Ciudad Juarez in Mexico, as well as Rio de Janeiro and Medellin. MSF has 
also initiated violence prevention and mental health-related activities and projects to 
address at-risk youth, including women and girls, in inner-city neighbourhoods across 
Central America.
The decision whether and how to deploy humanitarian assistance is not 
straightforward. Many agencies and donors are struggling with how best to negotiate 
with municipal authorities and communities and engage productively with complex and 
interconnected urban infrastructures. Most directors of humanitarian organisations 
first ask very basic questions, including in relation to the extent of their own 
competencies in cities under fire. What is the organisation’s added value? Will it make a 
real difference on the ground? Is it safe for staff? What are the legal implications?


===== PAGE 30 =====
020    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Introduction   |    020
Box 1.3 (continued) 
Humanitarian agencies that run violence prevention and emergency response 
programmes tend to be guided by a set of basic principles. These include being clear on 
the aims of the intervention, being flexible and ready to adapt, adopting highly localised 
interventions in partnership with civic authorities, developing strong community 
partnerships, planning for the long term (while also having an exit strategy) and doing 
no intentional harm. Agencies are taking advantage of lessons learned in war zones, but 
also adjusting and adapting them.
Many of the priorities of humanitarian agencies remain the same in war and non-war 
zones. The focus continues to be on protecting civilians and civilian assets, mitigating 
the effects of violence on urban populations and enabling or strengthening protective 
factors that limit exposure to violence. This includes investing in early childhood 
programmes, school-based activities, initiatives for single female-headed households, 
projects targeting at-risk adolescents, psycho-social support services and urban 
improvement schemes.
Another key goal is to supplement – rather than replace – services such as water 
provision, waste management and health and education. Aid agencies such as the 
ICRC and MSF have found it imperative to work with government institutions, rather 
than around them, with an emphasis more on coordination than implementation. 
Although there is more sensitivity today to the importance of building local capacity 
and ownership, working with national partners and avoiding the distortion of domestic 
markets is difficult. For aid agencies used to rapidly delivering aid, setting up logistics 
systems and working around (reluctant or interfering) state agencies, habits take time 
to change.
An additional critical lesson emerging from the field is the importance of high-quality 
data collection and real-time mapping of rapidly changing conditions on the ground. 
Access to a wide range of high-resolution information on beneficiary populations, 
service delivery systems and existing organisations and actors is critical. Even in 
data-scarce environments there are opportunities to harvest and analyse information, 
including using new technologies. Humanitarian agencies are strongly advised to build 
this capacity in-house.
Source: R. Muggah, ‘A Humanitarian Response to Central America’s Fragile Cities’, Humanitarian Exchange 69, June 
2017 (https://odihpn.org/magazine/the-humanitarian-consequences-of-violence-in-central-america/).


===== PAGE 31 =====
Context    |    021
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
Gangs 
Gangs are particularly urban phenomena, in part because of the concentration of pop-
ulation – it is simply easier to form gangs in urban settings than in rural areas – but also 
because economic resources are concentrated in cities. Gangs may be exceptionally 
powerful: in Haiti they have been ‘credited with overthrowing governments, silencing 
the political opposition, preventing foreign and local investment, creating a nascent 
kidnapping industry and terrorizing entire cities’.31 Many also serve as a social network 
for youth and groups not well served by public systems providing material and non-
material support. Such associations can improve the short-term welfare and resilience 
of their members, albeit with a long-term cost, to them and to society more widely.
The nature and changing shape of urban gangs is a complex issue and area of under-
standing. Research on ‘gangs in the global city’32 notes that, while most gangs are 
unsupervised teenage peer groups, many are institutionalised in ghettos, barrios and 
favelas across the world. In addition, ‘Gangs are “social actors” whose identities are 
formed by ethnic, racial and/or religious oppression [and] through participation in the 
underground economy’.33
The word ‘gang’ may be a catch-all term for a large and complex array of organised violent 
groups, with a wide range in terms of size, power, age (youth gangs are a defined grouping) 
and scope. In urban areas, research into gangs has found that they are often closely associated 
with the neighbourhoods they operate in. Research on urban gangs in Haiti found that:
•	
They are engaged in small-scale crime, including extortion, selling stolen goods and 
inflicting violence on those who may be a threat.
•	
They are sometimes politically motivated, and are often funded by businesses.
•	
They may be connected to a wider network, but individual units are often small and 
geographically isolated.
•	
They are made up of young men from low-income or informal settlements.
•	
They may provide help locally, for example with burial costs and school fees, or may 
provide protection against outside armed actors or police abuse.
31	  A. R. Kolbe, Revisiting Haiti’s Gangs and Organized Violence, HiCN Working Paper 147, 2013, cited in J. M. Hagedorn 
(ed.), Gangs in the Global City: Alternatives to Traditional Criminology (Chicago, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2007), 
cited in A. Winton, ‘Gangs in Global Perspective’, Environment and Urbanization 26(2), 2014 (https://journals.sagepub.
com/doi/abs/10.1177/0956247814544572).
32	  Hagedorn (ed.), Gangs in the Global City, cited in A. Winton, ‘Gangs in Global Perspective’, Environment and 
Urbanization 26(2), 2014 (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0956247814544572).
33	  Winton, ‘Gangs in Global Perspective’, p. 405.


===== PAGE 32 =====
022    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Gangs are key urban actors and are part of the governance structures of many urban areas, in 
particular low-income neighbourhoods and settlements. ICRC identifies three key points for 
engagement with gangs. First, it is important to gain acceptance from gang leaders as gangs 
are often organised hierarchically; second, gang leaders need to benefit from humanitarian 
interventions; and third, relief efforts which undermine a gang’s position may create risks. 
Interpersonal and gender-based violence
Interpersonal violence includes sexual abuse, child abuse, GBV, violence against the elderly 
and self-harm. One report notes that ‘every day, more than 4,000 people, over 90% of them 
in low- and middle-income countries, die because of violence. Of those killed, approximately 
2,300 die by their own hand and over 1,500 because of injuries inflicted by another person’.34 
Research has found that GBV in low-income settlements in low- and middle-income 
countries is frequent and acute.35 ActionAid’s Women in the City report identifies poor urban 
development and infrastructure as drivers of violence and insecurity for women and girls, 
with a lack of safe public spaces and public transport and unreliable recourse to police or 
the authorities. GBV in these circumstances includes physical and sexual violence from 
partners and violence against children. Sexual violence can also be linked to displace-
ment: ‘disaster after disaster produces irrefutable evidence that with displacement – be it 
as a result of natural hazards or conflict – the risk of physical abuse to women and girls rises 
substantially’.36
Research by the Women’s Refugee Commission37 on GBV against refugees in four cities 
concluded that the risks are a result of ‘multiple and complex unmet social, medical, and 
economic needs, as well as intersecting oppressions based on race, ethnicity, nationality, 
language, class, gender, sexual orientation, and disability. Misperceptions further 
contribute to discrimination toward refugees, which in turn heightens their vulnerability’. 
Their key recommendations for tackling urban GBV are:
34	  A. Butchart et al., Preventing Violence and Reducing Its Impact: How Development Agencies Can Help (Geneva: WHO, 
2008) (http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/43876/9789241596589_eng.
pdf;jsessionid=58B8188AD0AA79563256E8ACA6F9D308?sequence=1), p. 1.
35	  S. Chant, ‘Cities through a “Gender Lens”: A Golden “Urban Age” for Women in the Global South?’, Environment and 
Urbanization, 25(1) (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0956247813477809).
36	  IFRC, World Disasters Report 2007: Focus on Discrimination (Geneva: IFRC, 2017).
37	  Women’s Refugee Commission, Mean Streets: Identifying and Responding to Urban Refugees’ Risks of Gender-Based 
Violence (New York: Women’s Refugee Commission, 2016) (https://www.womensrefugeecommission.org/gbv/
resources/1272-mean-streets).


===== PAGE 33 =====
Context    |    023
Chapter 1
Chapter 1
•	
‘Systematize and broaden engagement of local actors. 
•	
Develop proactive, targeted strategies for addressing GBV risks related to shelter and 
livelihoods. 
•	
Prioritize, and earmark resources for, targeted actions and proactive outreach 
tailored to meet the needs of different at-risk subpopulations.  
•	
Formalize non-discrimination and standards of care for engaging all refugee 
subpopulations, put accountability mechanisms in place for UNHCR partners, and 
take a proactive approach to eliminating discrimination.’
For further recommendations, information and discussion, see Women’s Refugee 
Commission, Mean Streets: Identifying and Responding to Urban Refugees’ Risks of 
Gender-Based Violence (New York: Women’s Refugee Commission, 2016) (https://www.
womensrefugeecommission.org/gbv/resources/1272-mean-streets).
Violence and naturally-triggered disasters
The incidence of violence regularly increases after a naturally-triggered disaster. 
Research by the IFRC38 highlights that post-disaster violence can increase due to a 
combination of factors, including increased stress, loss of belongings, a failure of services, 
lack of money, resort to self-medication (alcohol) and drug use and living in temporary 
shelters, often in cramped and poor-quality conditions. The IFRC highlights that ‘people 
with pre-existing vulnerabilities to violence’ are especially at risk. This may include 
children, women, older people and people with mental and/or physical disabilities.
The IFRC recommends that the threat of violence should be treated in the same way as 
a public health emergency, with ‘the same urgency, attention and resources as other 
preventable public health emergencies such as diarrheal disease, respiratory illnesses, 
malaria, measles and malnutrition’.39 The same research suggests a number of actions that 
can be taken and describes good practice in preventing interpersonal violence, including 
violence-prevention education during the disaster risk reduction phase; prioritising the 
prevention of violence during the response phase; rapid response to cases of violence; 
enhanced data collection; and support for community-based social support systems. 
38	  Canadian Red Cross, Predictable, Preventable: Best Practices for Addressing Interpersonal and Self-Directed Violence 
During and After Disasters, 2012 (http://www.rcrc-resilience-southeastasia.org/document/predictable-preventable-
best-practices-for-addressing-interpersonal-and-self-directed-violence-during-and-after-disasters/).
39	  DeBoer, Muggah and Patel, Conceptualizing City Fragility and Resilience.


===== PAGE 34 =====
024    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
1.2.3 Naturally-triggered disasters 
It is by now well accepted that so-called ‘natural’ disasters are not natural. The natural 
phenomenon – windstorm, flood, earthquake, landslide, volcanic eruption or tsunami 
– needs to coincide with some form of vulnerability to produce a disaster. Until a disaster 
occurs, natural phenomena remain hazards, but are not disasters.
Cities are home to vulnerabilities that can coincide with a hazard to create a disaster. These 
include poorly built buildings, which may collapse in an earthquake (for a variety of reasons, 
not least corruption in the construction and regulatory process, which is discussed in 
Useful sources of further information
Access to affected neighbourhoods presents particular challenges. ICRC’s Safer Access 
Framework ‘proposes a structured approach to meeting the challenges of operating in 
sensitive and insecure contexts’. See https://www.icrc.org/en/what-we-do/cooperating-
national-societies/safer-access-all-national-societies.
Articles on urban violence in the IDMC’s annual Global Report on Internal Displacement 
(GRID): see http://www.internal-displacement.org/global-report 
The Humanitarian Action in Situations Other than War (HASOW) project, part of the 
Igarapé Institute: see https://igarape.org.br/en/issues/safer-cities/hasow/.
Robert Muggah’s analysis of urban violence in Central America is part of a wider set 
of articles on urban violence in a special issue of Humanitarian Exchange on ‘The 
Humanitarian Consequences of Violence in Central America’ (69, June 2017: https://
odihpn.org/magazine/the-humanitarian-consequences-of-violence-in-central-america/).
For further discussion of assessments, partnerships and sector-specific lessons see E. 
Lucchi, Humanitarian Interventions in Situations of Urban Violence, ALNAP Lessons Paper 
(London: ALNAP/ODI, 2013).
Hugo Slim, ‘Remember the Millions of People Living in Urban Violence’, Humanitarian 
Law and Poverty, July 2016 (http://blogs.icrc.org/law-and-policy/2016/07/04/icrc-on-
habitat-3-urban-violence/).
M. Harroff-Tavel, ‘Violence and Humanitarian Action in Urban Areas: New Challenges, 
New Approaches’, International Review of the Red Cross, 92(878), June 2010 (https://
www.icrc.org/en/international-review/article/violence-and-humanitarian-action-
urban-areas-new-challenges-new).


===== PAGE 35 =====
Context    |    025
Chapter 1
Section 2.2). Another example is poorly located neighbourhoods, such as low-lying land that 
floods, or housing on steep slopes prone to landslides. With high population densities and 
concentrations of infrastructure and services, cities are prone to high levels of vulnerability. 
Naturally-triggered disasters are almost certainly set to increase given the rapid pace of 
urbanisation, leading to more people being concentrated in often dangerous areas, usually 
poorer people living on lower-quality land. At the same time, the effects of climate change 
will cause stronger windstorms, increased flooding and rising temperatures. Indeed, some 
phenomena may be so overwhelming that even the best-laid plans struggle to cope, as 
happened in 2011 with the massive earthquake and ensuing tsunami which destroyed 
a number of urban areas along Japan’s east coast and damaged the Fukushima nuclear 
power plant. 
This section discusses urban disasters. It looks at displacement from disasters and everyday 
urban disaster risks. It links very closely to a number of other sections, in particular Section 
1.2.4 on climate change, Section 2.3 on resilience, Section 1.4 on vulnerability and Section 
2.2 on corruption. This section (like most of the others) seeks to distil key relevant points 
related to an enormous issue. Further reading is provided on a number of points discussed.  
The scale of urban disasters
The risk of naturally-triggered disasters in urban areas has increased in recent years, 
especially among those living in low-income settlements.40 Between 2008 and 2017, the most 
prevalent recorded disaster types were floods (1,522), followed by storms (1,001) and other 
types (622). Floods are thought to have affected 730 million people. Some two billion people 
have been affected by the consequences of natural hazards over the last ten years, 95% of 
which were weather-related (such as floods and windstorms).41 Urban disasters are also 
expensive: in the built environment, global expected average annual losses associated with 
earthquakes, floods, tsunamis, storm surges and wind from tropical cyclones is estimated 
at $314 billion.42
At an individual, neighbourhood and city level, vulnerability comprises three elements 
– exposure to risk (the threat of a disaster), susceptibility to harm and ability to reduce or 
remove the risk. Given this definition, it is unsurprising that the most vulnerable are also 
the poorest or most marginalised in society). Underlying vulnerability is almost always the 
40	  D. Dodman et al., Understanding the Nature and Scale of Urban Risk in Low- and Middle-income Countries and its 
Implications for Humanitarian Preparedness, Planning and Response, Human Settlements Discussion Paper Series, 
Climate Change and Cities (London: IIED, 2013) (http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/10624IIED.pdf).
41	  According to the EM-DAT database, recorded in IFRC, World Disasters Report: Leaving No One Behind (Geneva: IFRC, 
2018) (https://media.ifrc.org/ifrc/world-disaster-report-2018/).
42	  UNISDR, Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction (Geneva: UNISDR, 2015).


===== PAGE 36 =====
026    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
chief determinant of the impact of disasters. For example, the devastating 7.0 magnitude 
earthquake that struck Haiti in 2010 may have killed anywhere between 50,000 and 220,000 
people,  while the much more powerful 8.8 magnitude earthquake43 that hit Chile six weeks 
later killed under 1,000 – still a large death toll, but substantially lower thanks to better 
preparation and stronger buildings and infrastructure. In Haiti, poor-quality governance and 
public service provision led to a lack of investment over decades and widespread poverty. At 
the time of the earthquake, Haiti ranked 149th on the Human Development Index, with Chile 
a full 100 places higher, at 49. The links between corruption and disaster are discussed in 2.2.
Different hazard types produce different kinds of disaster. For instance, a flood may be 
expensive and cause widespread damage, but the death toll may be lower when compared to 
a rapid-onset disaster such as an earthquake. Location also matters: where cities are relates 
to the degree of risk (the exposure) an area might have to a natural hazard. Globally, around 
two-thirds of cities with populations over five million44 are located in low-lying coastal areas or 
along rivers at risk of flooding. In Africa, around 50% of urban residents live in arid areas with low 
rainfall; in India, the equivalent figure is two-thirds.45 Cities located along the Pacific coast and 
in the Himalayas are at high risk of earthquakes and other geological phenomena. According 
to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), ‘Inland cities face different hazards 
to coastal cities, including risks arising from floods, heat islands, desiccation, desertification, 
reduced fresh water supply, low food security, and the impact of diseases’.46  
Displacement from disasters
Figure 1.4 indicates that many more people are displaced by weather-related hazards such 
as floods, compared to geophysical events such as earthquakes. Disasters also contribute 
to rural to urban migration. Traditional ways of life are affected, for example by land being 
rendered unproductive by rising sea levels and coastal erosion, resulting in climate-induced 
migration (see Section 1.2.4 for further discussion).47
43	  It should be noted that the epicentre was at a greater depth in Chile than in Haiti, meaning that the earth 
absorbed more of the earthquake’s impact.  
44	  G. McGranahan, D. Balk and B. Anderson, ‘Risk of Climate Change for Urban Settlements in Low Elevation Coastal 
Areas’ in G. Martine et al. (eds), The New Global Frontier: Urbanization, Poverty and Environment in the 21st Century 
(London: 2007), cited in Dodman et al., Understanding the Nature and Scale of Urban Risk. 
45	  Dodman et al., Understanding the Nature and Scale of Urban Risk.
46	  C. E. Hanson et al. (eds), Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2007), quoted in Dodman et al., Understanding the Nature and Scale of Urban Risk, p. 20.
47	  A. Gero, J. Kohlitz and J. Willetts, ‘Informal Settlements in the Pacific and Links to Sustainable Development’, 
Development Bulletin 78, 2017 (https://opus.lib.uts.edu.au/bitstream/10453/118057/1/Informal%20settlements%20
in%20the%20Pacific%20and%20links%20to%20sustainable%20development.pdf).


===== PAGE 37 =====
Context    |    027
Chapter 1
Box 1.4 The Nepal earthquakes in 2015
The two major earthquakes that struck Nepal in 2015 caused extensive damage there 
and in northern areas of the Indian state of Bihar. An assessment visit shortly after the 
first earthquake found that many unreinforced masonry buildings as well as reinforced 
concrete houses had collapsed, as well as heritage structures such as temples. The 
study attributed the damage in part to a ‘widespread lack of preparedness even 
when the seismic hazard of the Himalayan region is well established’, including poor 
construction practices.
Source: C. Rai Durgesh et al., ‘Reconnaissance of the Effects of the M7.8 Gorkha (Nepal) Earthquake of April 25, 2015’, 
Geomatics: Natural Hazards and Risk 7(1).
Figure 1.4 New displacements by disasters by hazard category, 
2008–16
Source: IDMC, Global Report on Internal Displacement, 2017, p. 32.
	 2008	
2009	
2010	
2011	
2012	
2013	
2014	
2015	
2016
Average: 25.3 m/year
14.0%
31.9m
Millions
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
36.5
16.7
15.0
22.1
42.4
Weather related
Geophysical
32.4
Total
(2008–2016)
227.6m
86.0%
195.7m
19.1
19.2
24.2
20.8m
15.3m
13.9m
20.3m
17.4m
14.7m
4.5m
1.7m
1.8m
1.1m
1.5m
4.0m
15.8m
23.5m
38.3m
31.7m


===== PAGE 38 =====
028    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Flooding can cause massive damage and displace millions of people for weeks or months 
– or indeed for good if they relocate elsewhere. Recent examples include the 2012 Bangkok 
floods and extensive flooding in Pakistan in 2010 (and subsequent years), which covered 
one-fifth of the country and affected some 14 million people in urban and rural areas. The 
example in Box 1.5 is from the 2016 floods in Chennai. 
A common government response to hazards is often relocation to safer areas. While there is a 
strong case for this, often poorer neighbourhoods are forcibly relocated. There is a great deal 
of research and work concerning the unfairness – and often illegality – of forced evictions 
of low-income settlements by the authorities.48 In some instances neighbourhoods may 
be relocated to other equally risky locations, doing little to reduce the threat of disaster. In 
one Indian state, ‘state and local authorities have been building resettlement tenements on 
inland marsh areas using centrally sponsored schemes for affordable housing. These have 
been used as a “quick fix” after disasters, but without addressing communities’ underlying 
needs and inequalities. Their siting has also increased flood risk across the urban area, 
creating new risks’.49 Neighbourhoods may be relocated far from jobs and existing networks, 
storing up problems for the future.  
Everyday urban disaster risk
Flooding, which is for many a seasonal, recurring hazard, is one example of an ‘everyday’ 
risk that may affect urban areas. Others are captured in Table 1.2, drawn from the 2010 IFRC 
World Disasters Report, which focuses on urban risk. Urban poverty and vulnerability are 
further discussed in Section 1.4.
1.2.4 Climate change
Climate change exacerbates the risk of disasters and increases migration. The Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) warns that ‘global warming is likely to reach 
48	  See for example the archive of the Centre On Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE) at https://www.cohre.org/.
49	  G. Jain, C. Singh and T. Malladi, Rethinking Post-disaster Relocation in Urban India, IIED Briefing, August 2017 
(http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/17430IIED.pdf).
Box 1.5  Floods in Chennai
The Indian city of Chennai recorded nine large-scale floods between 1943 and 2015. 
Issues that increase flood risk include ‘haphazard town planning, choked drains, 
poor garbage management, and the rampant destruction of mangroves, forests, and 
pastures’. The severe flood of December 2015 was attributed to El Niño and a low 
pressure system, which led to extremely heavy rains.
Source: F. Rafiq et al., ‘Urban Floods in India’, International Journal of Scientific and Engineering Research 1, January 
2016 (https://www.ijser.org/researchpaper/Urban-Floods-in-India.pdf).


===== PAGE 39 =====
Context    |    029
Chapter 1
Aspect of human poverty
Implications for 
everyday risk
Implications for disaster risk
Inadequate and often unstable 
income and thus inadequate 
consumption of necessities, 
including food and, often, safe and 
sufficient water. Often, problems 
of indebtedness, with debt 
repayments significantly reducing 
income available for necessities. 
Inability to pay for insurance.
Very limited capacity to pay for 
housing, which in urban areas 
means living in the worst-quality and 
most overcrowded homes in illegal 
settlements on dangerous sites 
lacking provision for infrastructure 
and services – so very high levels of 
environmental health risk.
In most cities and many urban 
centres in low- and middle-income 
nations, most low-cost housing is 
on dangerous sites, e.g. at high risk 
from flooding or landslides. The lack 
of public provision for infrastructure 
and services adds to such risks, 
particularly for flooding.
Inadequate, unstable or risky 
asset base (e.g. property, skills, 
savings, social networks) for 
individuals, households or 
communities.
Very limited capacity to cope with 
stresses or shocks in everyday life 
– including rising prices or falling 
incomes, injuries or illness.
Very limited capacity to cope with 
disaster events when they occur, 
including lacking assets that are 
not damaged or destroyed by the 
disaster and having no insurance.
Poor-quality and often insecure, 
hazardous and overcrowded 
housing (often rented) located 
on dangerous sites such as flood 
plains, steep slopes and soft or 
unstable ground.
High risk levels from physical 
accidents, fires, extreme weather 
and infectious diseases – with risks 
often increased by overcrowding.
Housing is often of poor quality 
so at risk from storms/high winds, 
earthquakes, landslides, floods, fires 
and disease transmission, which may 
cause epidemics.
Inadequate provision of ‘public’ 
infrastructure (piped water, 
sanitation, drainage, roads, 
footpaths, etc.), which increases 
the health burden and often the 
work burden.
High levels of risk from contaminated 
water, inadequate sanitation, house 
flooding from lack of drainage.
Lack of protective infrastructure 
against flooding. Lack of roads, 
footpaths and drains inhibiting 
evacuation when disaster threatens 
or happens.
Inadequate provision of basic 
services – day care, schools, 
vocational training, healthcare, 
emergency services, public 
transport, communications, 
policing and good information on 
safe building practises.
Unnecessarily high health burden 
from diseases and injuries because 
of lack of healthcare and emergency 
response.
Lack of healthcare and emergency 
services that should provide rapid 
response to disaster (and should 
have had a role in reducing disaster 
risk and in disaster preparedness).
Limited or no safety net to 
ensure basic consumption can be 
maintained when income falls; 
also to ensure access to housing, 
healthcare and other necessities 
when these can no longer be paid 
for (or fully paid for).
Very limited capacity to cope with 
stresses or shocks in everyday life 
– including rising prices or falling 
incomes, injuries and diseases.
Very limited capacity to recover 
from disaster, for instance to afford 
food and water, rebuild homes and 
livelihoods. Lack of documentation 
often means not getting post-disaster 
support.
Lack of influence over what 
government does, including 
what it does in post-disaster 
responses.
Low-income survivors often not 
allowed to move back to their former 
settlement and rebuild their homes 
and livelihoods.
Little external support for 
low-income groups and their 
organisations to rebuild in ways that 
reduce disaster risk.
Limited influence over external 
civil society actors such as 
international aid agencies 
during disaster risk reduction 
and response.
Lack of local input can lead to 
inappropriate development 
investments or missed 
opportunities to reduce risk and to 
build more secure local economies 
and livelihoods.
International humanitarian actors 
can overwhelm local government 
and civil society organisations alike. 
Lack of partnership inhibits good 
governance.
Table 1.2 What different aspects of urban poverty imply for 
everyday and disaster risk
Source: IFRC, World Disasters Report (Geneva: IFRC, 2010), p.21.


===== PAGE 40 =====
030    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
1.5°C50 between 2030 and 2052 if it continues to increase at the current rate’.51 As a result, cities 
could experience more heatwaves and flooding (resulting from sea-level rises and changing 
rainfall patterns) and stronger windstorms. 
This section summarises the impacts of climate change on cities. It discusses urban climate 
change consequences, the impact of climate change on informal settlements and activities 
associated with climate change adaptation. This section is very closely related to Section 1.2.3 
on naturally-triggered disasters, where there is further discussion on and links to sources 
of information concerning disasters and hazards. Other closely aligned sections include 
Section 2.3 on resilience (concerning adaptive capacity) and Section 1.4 on vulnerability.   
Climate change and cities
Cities both contribute to, and are impacted by, climate change. Globally, cities produce up 
to 80% of greenhouse gas emissions and 70% of the world’s waste.52 A 1.5°C rise in tempera-
ture by 2050, as forecast by the IPCC, could expose more than 350 million people across a 
number of large cities (including Lagos and Shanghai) to deadly levels of heat. 
Climate change is impacting cities in different ways, creating complex challenges.  Table 1.3 
summarises the direct and indirect impacts of climate change on urban areas.
	
50	 A. Trundle and D. McEvoy, ‘Honiara Urban Resilience and Climate Action Plan (HURCAP), Honiara City Council and 
the Solomon Islands Government’, 2016.
51	  IPCC, Global Warming of 1.5 Degrees: Summary for Policymakers, 2018 (http://report.ipcc.ch/sr15/pdf/sr15_spm_final.
pdf), p. 6.
52	  World Bank, Natural Hazards, Unnatural Disasters: The Economics of Effective Prevention (Washington DC: World 
Bank, 2010) (http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2010/11/15/natural-hazards-unnatural-disasters-the-
economics-of-effective-prevention).
Box 1.6  Urban disasters in the Pacific
Pacific Island nations are undergoing rapid urbanization, much of it unplanned and 
informal. Tropical Cyclone Winston, which struck Fiji in 2016, caused widespread 
damage in the capital, Suva. A key priority in the immediate recovery concerned 
water, sanitation and emergency shelter. Following extensive flooding in Honiara, the 
capital of the Solomon Islands, a review50 of low-income settlements and disaster 
risk identified a number of challenges, including underlying chronic problems that 
exacerbated disaster risk, such as poor sanitation, lack of drainage, poorly built 
buildings and unsuitable siting of settlements in areas prone to landslides.
Source: Gero, Kohlitz and Willetts, ‘Informal Settlements in the Pacific’.


===== PAGE 41 =====
Context    |    031
Chapter 1
Change in climate
Direct impacts on urban 
areas
Indirect impacts on urban areas
Tropical cyclones, 
storm surge
High winds
Storm-surge induced-flood
Heavy rainfall
Disruption of livelihoods and city 
economics
Damage to infrastructure, including 
homes and businesses
Loss of life and assests
Extreme rainfall
More intense flooding
Higher risk of landslides 
As for tropical cyclones, storm surge 
and precipitation 
Drought
Water shortages
Higher water and food prices
Food insecurity
Disruption of hydo-electricity
Distress migration from rural areas
Extreme temperature 
events
Heatwaves
Coldwaves
Short term increase in energy 
demands for cooling/heating
Effects on human health
Abrupt climate 
change
Possible extreme sea-
level rise
Extreme temperature 
change
As for sea-level rise
As for extreme temperature events
 
Change in means
Temperature
Fewer cold days and nights
Warmer and more frequent 
hot days and nights
 
Increased risk of flooding
Increased risk of landslides
Coastal flooding
Increased energy demands for 
cooling
Reduced energy demands for 
heating
Worsening air quality intensified by 
urban heat islands
Creation of vector habitats in new 
areas
Distress migration from rural areas
Interruption of food supply net­
works
Increased transmission of malaria
Increased spread of cholera
Reduced income from agriculture 
and tourism
Salinisation of water resources
Damage to coastal infrastructure
Displacement of urban populations
Table 1.3 The direct and indirect impacts of climate change in 
urban areas
Source: D. Dodman et al., Understanding the Nature and Scale of Urban Risk in Low- and Middle-income Countries and 
Its Implications for Humanitarian Preparedness, Planning and Response (London: IIED, 2013) (http://pubs.iied.org/
pdfs/10624IIED.pdf).


===== PAGE 42 =====
032    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Vulnerability
Time period
Population
City estimate
Extreme heat
Present day
Over 200 million people 
Over 350 cities
2050s 
Over 1.6 billion people 
Over 970 cities
Extreme heat 
and poverty
Present day 
Over 26 million people 
Over 230 cities
2050s 
Nearly 215 million people 
Over 490 cities
Water availability
2050s
Over 650 million people 
Over 500 cities
Food security
2050s
Over 2.5 billion people 
Over 1,600 cities
Sea level rise
2050s 
Over 800 million people 
Over 570 cities
Sea level rise and 
power plants
2050s 
Over 450 million people 
Over 230 cities
Table 1.4  The effects of climate change: summary of global numbers
Source: The Future We Don’t Want: How Climate Change Could Impact the World’s Greatest Cities, UCCRN Technical 
Report (https://c40-production-images.s3.amazonaws.com/other_uploads/images/1789_Future_We_Don’t_Want 
Report_1.4_hi-res_120618.original.pdf).
Table 1.5 indicates the impact of the effects of climate change in terms of populations and 
numbers of cities affected. 
The consequences of urban climate change
In urban areas, the consequences of climate change could include:
•	
Increased climate-related displacement and migration. In 2016, climate and 
weather-related disasters displaced 23.5 million people, accounting for 97% of all 
disaster-related displacements. The ten largest disaster displacement events were 
weather-related.53 Climate change is also leading to migration to cities: one study 
in Mozambique suggested that 40% of migrants to urban areas had left their rural 
homes in part because of environmental problems, including ‘those likely to result 
from climate change’.54
•	
Security concerns. As OCHA notes, ‘the impact of climate change on water avail-
ability, food security, coastal boundaries, and population movements may also 
53	  IDMC, Global Report on Internal Displacement 2017 (http://www.internal-displacement.org/global-report/
grid2017/), p. 32.
54	  OCHA, Climate Change and Humanitarian Action: Key Emerging Trends and Challenges, OCHA Occasional Policy 
Briefing Series No. 2, 2009 (https://www.unocha.org/sites/unocha/files/Climate%20Change%20and%20
Humanitarian%20Action%202009_0.pdf), p. 5.


===== PAGE 43 =====
Context    |    033
Chapter 1
combine with non-climate related factors, such as poverty,governance and existing 
regional tensions, to trigger and exacerbate conflicts’.55
•	
Food scarcity, particularly in arid areas, affecting cities in sub-Saharan Africa (around 
half of Africa’s urban residents live in arid areas).   
•	
More frequent and intense droughts, which affect cities through, for example, 
increased migration of people unable to sustain rural livelihoods, as well as water 
shortages for poorer urban dwellers who cannot afford price rises or are unable to 
build boreholes.
•	
Increased health risks, including malaria and dengue fever in low-lying areas. 
Water-level rises may also contribute to increased levels of water-borne diseases 
and diarrhea.
55	  The Future We Don’t Want: How Climate Change Could Impact the World’s Greatest Cities, UCCRN Technical Report 
(https://c40-production-images.s3.amazonaws.com/other_uploads/images/1789_Future_We_Don’t_Want_Report_1.4_
hi-res_120618.original.pdf).
56   See ‘India Heatwave Claims More Than 2,000 Lives; Government Launches Education Campaigns’, 30 May 2015 
(https://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-05-30/india-reels-under-heatwave-as-death-toll-tops-2000/6509482).
55	  Ibid. 
Source: ‘PROJECT: Deepening and Expanding Heat Health Action in India’ (https://cdkn.org/project/deepening-and-
expanding-heat-health-action-in-india/?loclang=en_gb). 
Box 1.7  Urban heatwaves 
As the IPCC report cited above makes clear, heatwaves are a major threat to urban 
areas. According to recent research,55 the number of cities experiencing temperatures 
of over 35 degrees in a three-month average is expected to reach 970 by 2050, an 
increase from 354 currently. Many of these cities will be in Africa; the report found that 
‘by 2050, many of the most at risk cities with large urban populations in poverty will be 
in West Africa, as well as Sudan and Egypt’. 
Heatwaves are causing increased fatalities in India. In 2015, Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana alone tallied nearly 2,000 heat-related deaths.57 In the Gujarati city of 
Ahmedabad, low-income settlements suffer heat extremes both night and day, with 
limited ventilation.  According to one report, the adoption of a ‘heat action plan’ has 
reduced fatalities from extreme heat from over 1,000 in 2010 to just seven in 2016. The 
plan combines public awareness, building medical capacity and hospital readiness and 
having an effective early warning system.


===== PAGE 44 =====
034    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Impacts on informal settlements
Inevitably, people living in low-income settlements are least equipped to deal with climate 
change. The effects of heat, for example, are amplified substantially by poorly ventilated 
buildings; corrugated iron roofing also increases temperatures. One recent report56 
predicts that, by 2050, some 215 million people will be living in poverty in 495 cities that 
have a regular three-month average temperature of over 35 degrees – which is eight times 
the current number. Settlements that lack adequate drainage or sanitation facilities tend 
to fare worse when flooding occurs than better-maintained neighbourhoods. For further 
discussion on the most vulnerable in cities see Section 1.4.
Climate change adaptation 
Climate change adaptation (CCA) can be defined as ‘the process of preparing for, and adjusting 
proactively to, climate change – both negative impacts as well as potential opportunities’.57 
The World Bank’s 2011 report Guide to Climate Change Adaptation in Cities notes that key 
actions for implementing CCA include urban design and planning, improved urban transport, 
more efficient use of buildings and better waste management. The guide provides a roadmap 
for city decision-makers to develop and implement CCA plans, including city adaptation 
plans, policies and actions. It also discusses the central importance of policies and practices 
around building resilience, in particular in relation to adaptive capacity (discussed below). 
58  The Future We Don’t Want, p. 18.
57	  World Bank, Guide to Climate Change Adaptation in Cities (Washington DC: World Bank, 2011) 
(http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/Resources/336387-1318995974398/
GuideClimChangeAdaptCities.pdf), p. 4.
Source: R. Wilson and T. Smith, Urban Resilience to Climate Change Challenges in Africa, Policy Research Project 
on Urban Resilience to Climate Change Challenges in Africa (Austin, TX: University of Texas, 2015) 
(https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783319039848). 
Box 1.8  Climate change and health impacts in Kampala 
The IPCC predicts that Uganda’s temperature will increase by 1.5 degrees by 2030, 
and by 4.3 degrees by 2080. As a result the capital, Kampala, may see a 20% increase 
in rain, accompanied by stronger and more frequent storms. Both are likely to lead 
to increased flooding. Sanitation conditions are poor – pit latrines are widely used. 
Increased flooding combines poorly with pit latrines, leading to overflows of effluent 
and the contamination of water sources (on which the majority of the population 
relies). This in turn leads to more outbreaks of disease: Kampala suffered five recorded 
outbreaks of cholera between 1997 and 2008, which were linked to flooding.


===== PAGE 45 =====
Context    |    035
Chapter 1
The concept of resilience is discussed in Section 2.3. 
The extent to which CCA can be enacted depends on adaptive capacity, which can be defined 
as ‘The ability of systems, institutions, humans and other organisms to adjust to potential 
damage, to take advantage of opportunities, or to respond to consequences’.58 This in turn 
depends on cost (financial, social and political), the policy environment and a willingness 
to change behaviour. This poses a challenge for a number of cities that are at high risk. For 
example, those cities in Asia most vulnerable to climate risk (namely Manila, Dhaka and 
Jakarta) also have the lowest adaptive capacity.59
Given the potentially enormous costs of CCA, funds that arrive in low-income neigh-
bourhoods post-disaster need to be used, not only to meet present needs, but also 
invested to reduce the impact of future shocks. One example is geographically-focused 
initiatives such as area-based approaches (ABAs, discussed in Section 3.2). This can be 
coupled with a systems-based perspective on the city, so that strategic investments 
can be made that meet immediate needs, but which also contribute to mitigating long-
term impacts. Another opportunity lies in engaging in post-disaster and post-conflict 
reconstruction planning that uses morphological approaches, for example working with 
existing topography to minimise flooding, or adopting low-carbon approaches in post-
58	  IPCC, ‘Glossary’, undated (https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/syr/AR5_SYR_FINAL_Glossary.pdf), p. 118.
59	  WWF, Mega-stress for Mega-cities: A Climate Vulnerability Ranking of Major Coastal Cities in Asia (Gland: WWF 
International, 2009), cited in Dodman et al., Understanding the Nature and Scale of Urban Risk, p. 17.
Useful sources of further information
The website of C40, ‘a network of the world’s megacities committed to addressing climate 
change’, comprises extensive information, guidance and research on a variety of themes, 
including heat extremes, climate change and poverty, water availability and food security. 
The website is https://www.c40.org/.
D. Broekhoff, G. Piggott and P. Erickson, Building Thriving, Low-Carbon Cities: An Overview 
of Policy Options for National Governments (Stockholm: Stockholm Environment Institute, 
2018) (https://newclimateeconomy.report/workingpapers/workingpaper/building-
thriving-low-carbon-cities-an-overview-of-policy-options-for-national-governments/).
World Bank, Guide to Climate Change Adaptation in Cities (Washington DC: World 
Bank, 2011) (http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/
Resources/336387-1318995974398/GuideClimChangeAdaptCities.pdf).


===== PAGE 46 =====
036    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
crisis (disaster and conflict) reconstruction. A recent systematic review of energy efficiency 
in buildings, low-carbon transport and sustainable waste management concluded that 
‘low-carbon measures can help to achieve a range of development priorities, such as job 
creation, improved public health, social inclusion, and improved accessibility’.60
In conclusion, more frequent and worse floods and windstorms, combined with higher 
temperatures and more severe drought, will lead to increasing demand for humanitarian 
response, which in turn will need to be much more strategic in its actions (not only because 
of climate change, but also because of the other issues described in this review around the 
scale and challenges of urban humanitarian action). Strategic decisions need to consider a 
changing future, not just focus on the present. 
1.3 Forced displacement
People can be forcibly displaced as a result of conflict, violence, disasters and climate change. 
People who stay within the country they are resident in are called internally displaced 
persons (IDPs), while those who flee abroad are classed as refugees. The distinction is 
important: while refugees enjoy forms of globally recognised protection,  such as the 1951 
Refugee Convention, IDPs are provided no such formal legal cover. Although there is a set of 
international standards focused on IDPs – The Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, 
adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1998 – unlike the Refugee Convention this does not 
have the force of a binding treaty.61 Further still, people may be stateless (and rendered 
deliberately so by the authorities in their home country), as is the case for the Rohingya in 
Myanmar. UNHCR estimates that at least 10 million people were without a nationality or at 
risk of statelessness at the end of 2016.62
This section outlines the scale of displacement. It discusses displacement and cities, 
and current thinking and practice in humanitarian responses to urban displacement. 
This section relates closely to a number of others in this review, including Section 1.4 on 
the most vulnerable, Section 1.5 on urban actors, Section 1.2.1 on conflict and Section 1.2.2 
on violence. 
60	  A. Gouldson et al., The Economic and Social Benefits of Low-Carbon Cities: A Systematic Review of the Evidence 
(London and Washington DC: Coalition for Urban Transitions, 2018) (https://newclimateeconomy.report/
workingpapers/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2018/06/The-Economic-and-Social-Benefits-of-Low-Carbon-Cities-A-
systematic-review-of-the-evidence.pdf), p. 1.
61	  See ‘Twenty Years of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement’, Forced Migration Review, 59, October 2018 
(https://www.fmreview.org/sites/fmr/files/FMRdownloads/en/GuidingPrinciples20_0.pdf).
62	  Adrian Edwards, ‘Forced Displacement Worldwide at Its Highest in Decades’, UNHCR, 19 June 2017 
(http://www.unhcr.org/afr/news/stories/2017/6/5941561f4/forced-displacement-worldwide-its-highest-decades.html).


===== PAGE 47 =====
Context    |    037
Chapter 1
1.3.1 The scale of displacement 
Displacement from conflict, persecution and violence is at its highest level for 70 years. 
According to UNHCR, by the end of 2017 68.5 million people were forcibly displaced 
worldwide,63 a large proportion of them children. Nearly two-thirds (40 million people) 
are IDPs. Over 80% of refugees are in low- and middle-income countries, which are also 
experiencing the fastest rates of urbanisation. Countries in the Middle East have received 
high numbers of displaced people as a result of conflict and unrest following the 2010 
Arab Spring, and the conflict in Syria in particular. Meanwhile, displacement from disasters 
is set to worsen, with increasing numbers of naturally-triggered disasters and increasing 
impacts of climate change (see Sections 1.2.3 and 1.2.4 respectively). In 2016 displacement 
from disasters was more than three times higher than from conflict and violence, with over 
24 million people newly displaced in 118 countries64 (the annual average between 2007 
and 2018 was over 25 million).65
Displacement is also increasingly an urban phenomenon: globally, it is thought that some 
60% of refugees live in urban areas, rising to close to 80–90% in countries such as Jordan and 
63	  UNHCR, Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2017 (Geneva: UNHCR, 2018) (http://www.unhcr.org/
globaltrends2017/).
64	  The equivalent figure for conflict was 6.9 million. IDMC, Global Report on Internal Displacement (Geneva: IDMC, 2017).
67	  These are registered numbers from UNHCR; the actual figure may be as much as 30,000–40,000 higher.
Source: C. Wake and T. Cheung, Livelihood Strategies of Rohingya Refugees in Malaysia (London: ODI, 2016) 
(https://www.odi.org/publications/10449-livelihood-strategies-rohingya-refugees-malaysia).
Box 1.9  Urban marginalisation for Rohingya refugees in Malaysia 
Around 65,000 Rohingya who have fled persecution in Myanmar are currently living in 
Malaysia,67 all of whom are thought to be in cities (given there are no camps), mostly 
in the capital, Kuala Lumpur. While the government put in place a plan to issue 10,000 
temporary work permits in 2006 to allow refugees to work legally, one study notes that 
this was ‘halted after a few days amidst corruption claims’. The same study reports that 
‘the tenuous legal status of refugees in Malaysia renders them vulnerable to employment-
related abuse and exploitation, including non- and partial payment of wages, verbal 
abuse, arbitrary dismissal, physical abuse, sexual harassment and workplace raids 
… Refugees have little recourse to address these problems, and most incidents go 
unreported’. Other issues include access to healthcare and education; concerning the 
latter, it is thought that only 40% of refugee children have any access to education.


===== PAGE 48 =====
038    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Turkey.66 Over half of IDPs are also thought to be living in urban areas.67 Once the crisis 
that caused their displacement has passed, people may choose not to return to their rural 
homes, preferring instead to stay in or move to cities in search of a better life; following 
the end of the civil war in Sudan, for example, almost 2 million South Sudanese from rural 
backgrounds returned to the South Sudanese capital, Juba, doubling the city’s population 
in the six years between 2005 and 2011.68
1.3.2 Urban displacement challenges
Issues displaced people may encounter in cities include:
•	
The trauma of being uprooted, typically more than once, to different locations, often 
without a choice being involved.
•	
Discrimination due to race, ethnicity or religion. Authorities may view displaced 
people from conflict settings as ‘terrorists’ or rebels. 
•	
Lack of official documentation, such as work permits or passports.
•	
Few if any social networks.
•	
Health and psychological issues, especially for newly-arrived displaced people who 
may have had arduous journeys.
•	
Poor prospects of employment (if allowed to work at all in the formal sector), especially 
for people displaced from rural areas or with a low level of formal education, who 
may not have the skills to compete for work in the urban economy.
•	
Where work permits are not allowed, such as for refugees, a reliance on the informal 
economy for work, often at reduced pay rates. Displaced people working in the informal 
economy can be vulnerable to abuse by their employers and risk being arrested.
•	
Displaced women and girls may be at greater risk of sexual violence.69 
•	
Trafficking70 and modern-day slavery.
66	  World Bank, Cities of Refuge in the Middle East: Bringing an Urban Lens to the Forced Displacement Challenge, Policy 
Note (Washington DC: World Bank and GFDRR, 2017) (http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/922371511267498593/pdf/121515-repl-CITIES-OF-REFUGE-01242018webLATEST.pdf), p. 6.
67	  IDMC, Global Overview 2015: People Internally Displaced by Conflict and Violence (Geneva: IDMC, 2015).
68	  IDMC, Global Report on Internal Displacement.
69	  IRC, Violence in the City: A Systematic Review of the Drivers of Violence against Displaced Populations in Urban 
Crisis and Post-crisis Settings (New York: IRC, 2017) (https://www.rescue-uk.org/sites/default/files/document/1290/
violenceinthecityweb.pdf).
70   For a powerful account, see Puttanee Kangkun and John Quinley, ‘Mass Atrocities and Human Trafficking: Rohingya 
Muslims on the Move’, Humanitarian Exchange, 73, October 2018 (https://odihpn.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/
HE-73_web.pdf).	


===== PAGE 49 =====
Context    |    039
Chapter 1
•	
Arbitrary arrest, detention and eviction, especially if they lack the right documentation.
•	
Uncertain timeframes, where displaced people may not return home for years or 
decades, or not at all. 
•	
Isolation. Refugee families may be dispersed across a city, living in a neighbourhood 
where they may not speak a common language or may feel stigmatised.
•	
Due to lack of choice, many live in informal settlements, with overcrowding, poor 
access to services and the threat of eviction.
Rapid migration can have a substantial impact on cities. This includes increased pressure on 
land and services, more competition for jobs and potential risks of conflict between host and 
incoming populations over scarce resources, especially in poorer urban settlements. There 
can also be positive impacts, however. In Jordan, for instance, ‘there has been an increase 
in rental housing stock to meet Syrian demand, benefiting both the displaced and small 
landlords in host communities’.71 In Amman, the Greater Amman Municipality is actively 
supporting the start-up of refugee-owned businesses.
Box 1.10 (page 040) provides a helpful summary of the key impacts of urban displacement 
in cities. For further information on internal displacement, see IDMC’s website at 
www.internal-displacement.org, and ICRC, Displaced in Cities: Experiencing and Respond-
ing to Urban Internal Displacement Outside Camps  (Geneva: ICRC, 2018), which provides 
case studies of displacement experiences in Baidoa in Somalia, Maiduguri in Nigeria, 
Mosul in Iraq and San Pedro Sula in Honduras (https://shop.icrc.org/displaced-in-
cities-experiencing-and-responding-to-urban-internal-displacement-outside-camps-
2822.html).
1.3.3 Current practice
Humanitarian aid actors have been slow to recognise the ‘urbanisation of displacement’, 
with agencies and their mechanisms organised towards setting up and managing refugee 
and IDP camps.72 UNHCR’s 2009 policy on urban refugees states that it essentially applies 
the same principles as it would in camp settings, while recognising that cities are legiti-
mate places for refugees to live, and that they need protection.73 The 2014 Policy on 
Alternatives to Camps, which includes urban areas, expands on the 2009 policy, stating 
that the goal should be ‘working to remove such restrictions so that refugees have the 
71   World Bank, Cities of Refuge in the Middle East, p. 9.	
72	  It was only in 2009, for instance, that UNHCR updated its policy to consider urban areas. 
73	  UNHCR Policy on Refugee Protection and Solutions in Urban Areas, September 2009 (http://www.unhcr.org/en-au/
protection/hcdialogue%20/4ab356ab6/unhcr-policy-refugee-protection-solutions-urban-areas.html).


===== PAGE 50 =====
040    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Environment
Health
Security
Education
Livelihood
Housing and 
infrastructure
Social and 
cultural life
Urban 
internal 
displacement
Cities can provide higher levels of 
anonymity and security to displaced 
people. However, displaced children, 
women and other vulnerable groups 
can be at risk of abuse and violence 
in informal settlements, mismanaged 
collective centres or other housing 
arrangements. Young IDPs in cities 
affected by criminal violence can 
be forced to join gangs, increasing 
insecurity for all.
Overcrowding, pollution and limited 
access to water and sanitation 
increase the risk of communicable and 
environmental diseases, especially 
for fragile people in the displaced and 
the host communities. Mental health 
has been identified as an important 
impact that tends to be overlooked. 
Overall, jobs are more available in cities than 
in camps or rural areas. In the long run, cities 
can support self-reliance. Yet, in most cases, 
urban IDPs fare worse or find themselves 
in similar conditions to the urban poor. 
When fleeing from rural areas, agricultural 
workers’ skills become irrelevant. They often 
have lower incomes and less extensive social 
networks before displacement, making it 
even more difficult for them to adapt to their 
new environment.
Large inflows of IDPs in already over-populated 
urban areas can rapidly increase air, water and 
soil pollution levels. Cities must be prepared 
and able to adapt their waste management, 
sanitation and water supply infrastructure in 
case of mass displacement.
In cities, IDPs often live in overcrowded, sub-
standard conditions. They are more likely to 
face evictions and abuses from landlords. 
Rent is regularly cited as one of the main 
expenses for IDPs, but they also live in host 
families or collective centres. Ensuring their 
access to secure tenure and decent housing 
must be a priority for urban authorities. 
Cities offer better access to education than 
rural areas. IDPs tend to prioritize education 
over other services as it is a transferrable 
human capital that is key for rebuilding 
lives after displacement. Education in urban 
areas can be affected by the use of schools 
as emergency shelters for IDPs. School 
systems in cities must adapt rapidly to ensure 
continued quality education for children from 
both displaced and host communities, and 
sometimes that is not the case.
As compared to camps, cities can allow more 
social mobility and local integration, which is 
becoming the preferred durable solution to 
urban displacement. Yet, many IDPs can find 
themselves socially and culturally excluded 
and marginalized because of their gender, 
ethnic and socioeconomic background. 
Creating ties with host communities is 
essential to support their integration in new 
urban spaces. Urban authorities must make 
sure they are included via participatory 
processes, along with the other urban dwellers 
that are often excluded from decision-making.
Box 1.10  Key impacts of urban displacement in cities
Source: IDMC, 2019 Global Report on Internal Displacement (Geneva: IDMC, forthcoming).


===== PAGE 51 =====
Context    |    041
Chapter 1
possi-bility to live with greater dignity, independence and normality as members of the 
community, either from the beginning of displacement or as soon as possible thereafter’.74 
Other actors are also increasingly turning their attention to urban displacement. Specific 
recommendations from the Global Alliance for Urban Crises (GAUC), for example, include 
taking an area-based approach (see Section 3.2), supporting livelihoods and engaging 
in shelter provision (see Section 4.2).75 Concerning IDPs, recent research76 notes that 
identifying and reaching IDPs may be more difficult in a variegated, dense and complex 
urban environment, or where they choose to remain invisible for fear of persecution or 
hostility from host communities and the authorities. Displacement also brings with it 
protection concerns. One review by IRC into the drivers of violence against displaced people 
in urban areas found that it took a number of forms, including verbal, physical and sexual 
violence. The research recommended programming that recognised women’s and girls’ 
particular susceptibility to violence; prioritising the legal status and documentation of 
displaced people; and improving the monitoring and reporting of sexual abuse (see Section 
1.2.2 on urban violence, Section 1.4 on vulnerability and Section 4.7 on protection).77
Related to this, there have been regular calls for host authorities and communities to allow 
displaced people greater agency and rights, including ‘the free, active and meaningful 
participation of migrants, refugees and IDPs in urban decision-making processes and 
urban and spatial development’ and their inclusion in ‘national action plans and strategies, 
such as plans on the provision of public housing or national strategies to combat racism 
and xenophobia’.78 The New Urban Agenda, ratified at the HABITAT III conference in Quito, 
Ecuador, in 2016, calls for ‘refugees, internally displaced persons, and migrants, particularly 
the poorest and those in vulnerable situations’79 to enjoy equal rights to the city, including 
74	  UNHCR, Policy on Alternatives to Camps, 2014 (http://www.unhcr.org/5422b8f09.html), p. 4.
75	  GAUC, Forced Displacement in Urban Areas: What Needs To Be Done, October 2016 (https://www.rescue-uk.org/
report/forced-displacement-urban-areas-what-needs-be-done).
76	  A. Controneo, ‘Specificities and Challenges of Responding to Internal Displacement in Urban Settings’, 
International Review of the Red Cross, 99 (1), 2017 (https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/international-review-of-
the-red-cross/article/specificities-and-challenges-of-responding-to-internal-displacement-in-urban-settings/437B517C
56BBF0BE1F2BD01AE0795008).
77	  For further discussion on actors, see P. Sitko and A. Massella, Urban Displacement from Different Perspectives: An 
Overview of Approaches to Urban Displacement, GAUC, 2019 (https://drive.google.com/
file/d/1o6VI0Iil1jaf0hcnx4nxUOAZ-kNyfEBw/view). See also A. Masella and P. Sitko, Protocol of Engagement between 
Local Governments and Humanitarian Actors, GAUC, January 2019 (https://drive.google.com/file/d/1IzkZm_
MqvwFWCY56EiSRg-Wp-DwP6dqh/view).
78	  UN-Habitat, ‘HABITAT III Issues Paper 2: Migration and Refugees in Urban Areas’, 3 June 2015 
(https://www.alnap.org/help-library/habitat-iii-issue-papers-2-migration-and-refugees-in-urban-areas).
79	  The New Urban Agenda (https://habitat3.org/).


===== PAGE 52 =====
042    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
movement, access and non-discrimination (for example in equal access to housing and – 
where refugees are allowed to work – access to equal employment opportunities). Research 
by IRC80 on forcibly displaced people in the Tanzanian capital Dar es Salaam identified the 
following principles for operational agencies:
•	
Ensure that displaced people are aware of the services they are entitled to.
•	
Be clear on how to fight discrimination towards displaced people, and within that, 
promote social cohesion between host and displaced populations.  
•	
Within a specific area, such as a neighbourhood, understand the different vul-
nerabilities of different groups.
Other recent research81 into urban displacement and the responses of humanitarian aid 
organisation argues for a more developmental, long-term approach involving a wider range 
of actors. Recommendations include:
•	
Address the needs of refugees and host communities equally, in terms of jobs and 
services.
80	  IRC, The Right to the City for Urban Displaced.
81	  World Bank, Cities of Refuge in the Middle East.
See IRC, The Right to the City for Urban Displaced: A Review of the Barriers to Safe and Equal Access to the City for the 
Displaced Residents of Dar es Salaam (London: IRC, 2017) (https://www.rescue-uk.org/report/right-city-urban-
displaced), pp. 8–9.
Box 1.11  Permit and non-permit refugees in Dar es Salaam 
The Tanzanian capital Dar es Salaam is home to tens of thousands of refugees from 
DRC and Burundi. Some have been in the city for nearly 40 years. Refugees are roughly 
identified as belonging to one of three groups: a ‘permit refugee’ who has been registered 
and is allowed to live outside of camps; a ‘non-permit refugee’ who may live in the city 
but does not have permission to do so; and non-registered migrants, who do not have 
refugee status. UNHCR, with a partner organisation, the Relief to Development Society 
(REDESO), and the government’s Department of Refugee Affairs provide financial and 
medical support to ‘permit refugees’. Non-permit refugees and those not registered do 
not qualify for support. Refugees are required to live in ‘designated areas’. However, ‘non-
permit refugees’ are allowed to live in the city if they apply for and are granted a residence 
permit. The permit can be very expensive (up to $3,000). Permits have in effect been 
phased out: according to IRC, ‘none of these permits have been issued since 2012 … and 
previous permits have expired’.


===== PAGE 53 =====
Chapter 1
Context    |    043
Figure 1.5  A development-oriented approach to urban displacement
Syria
In conflict
Iraq
Recently emerged 
from conflict
Lebanon
Some instability 
and coping with 
refugee influx
West Bank and 
Gaza
Some instability, 
complex political 
situation
Jordan
Stable but coping 
with refugee 
influx
Emergency response
Rebuilding 
infrastructure, 
expanding services, 
reconstructing housing
–	 Iraq Emergency 
Operation for 
Development Project
Building development 
solutions
Investing in municipal 
services and equipment 
to relieve immediate 
pressure on services 
caused by refugee influx
–	 Beirut urban masterplan 
focused on resilience
–	 Lebanon Municipal 
Services Emergency 
Project
Engagement
Building urban 
resilience , supporting 
municipalities in 
enhancing capacity 
and services delivery
–	 Beirut urban 
masterplan focused on 
resilience
–	 Lebanon Municipal 
Services Emergency 
Project
Stability
Fragility
Relief	
Development
Nature of response
Proximity to conflict
Source: World Bank, Cities of Refuge in the Middle East: Bringing an Urban Lens to the Forced Displacement Challenge, Policy Note (Washington DC: World Bank and GFDRR, 2017) 
(http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/922371511267498593/pdf/121515-repl-CITIES-OF-REFUGE-01242018webLATEST.pdf), p. 15.


===== PAGE 54 =====
044    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Integrate civil society organisations into collaborative activities.  
•	
Work with and through national and local government. 
Drawing on experience from the Middle East, Figure 1.5 illustrates the idea of taking a 
developmental approach to long-term urban displacement. Three overlapping stages are 
indicated: short-term emergency response; medium-term ‘development solutions’; and 
long-term efforts towards building urban resilience (see Section 2.3). 
As this example indicates, and as is repeated throughout this Good Practice Review, effective 
aid provision in cities needs to take a long-term view beyond an assumed response or 
recovery phase. At the same time, and particularly for people fleeing conflict, humanitarian 
response is mired in complexity and uncertainty, with difficult decisions to be made on the 
scale and duration of assistance.82 Early efforts at protection are essential, as is assistance 
in securing livelihoods (to prevent people from sliding further into poverty) and finding 
adequate shelter and legal recognition (where relevant, such as the right to work or access 
social services). Above all, the goal should be the integration of new arrivals in the city. This 
concerns in particular the leadership of city authorities in enacting measures to achieve this 
(such as ensuring newly-arriving displaced people have equal access to services), as well as 
civil society organisations and others, such as faith-based organisations, which are often 
active in providing immediate support, such as food banks and clothing.
1.4 Vulnerability
Humanitarian operations that seek to help crisis-affected people usually try to identify the 
most vulnerable and/or those most in need of assistance. In urban areas the most vulnerable 
individuals or groups may be hidden and difficult to identify, and may defy assumptions 
and expectations. Who is most vulnerable may also be subject to flux depending on the 
timing and nature of a crisis. In many rapidly growing cities, the most vulnerable are often 
the urban poor, who may not have been affected by a disaster directly, but may be more in 
need than those who are. 
This section discusses the most vulnerable in relation to the concept of ‘leave no one behind’. 
It presents an assets-based understanding of vulnerability. It discusses vulnerability and 
poverty, urban marginalisation and displacement. How to engage those most vulnerable, 
and the programming implications, are covered in relevant sections of this Good Practice 
Review. For example, Sections 3.5, 3.6 and 3.7 cover context analysis, assessments and 
profiling and targeting. Sections on protection (4.7) and shelter (4.2) also refer to approaches 
for ensuring that assistance reaches the most marginalised. 
82	  Noting that a critical decision in urban humanitarian response (and generally) is when to withdraw assistance. See 
for example ALNAP’s urban lessons paper, lesson number one, concerning clear boundaries for urban humanitarian 
action (Sanderson and Knox-Clarke, 2012)


===== PAGE 55 =====
Context    |    045
Chapter 1
1.4.1 Leave no one behind
Humanitarian action focuses on providing assistance to those who need it most. As the 
IFRC’s 2018 World Disasters Report puts it, ‘Neglecting to make humanitarian assistance 
available and accessible to those in most acute need not only fails to abide by humanitarian 
principles but also increases the vulnerability of those same populations – leaving them 
even poorer, more at risk in the face of future shocks, and even further behind’.83
The 2016 New Urban Agenda asserts as its first core principle to ‘leave no one behind’84 
(see Section 3.1 on frameworks). This is also a central theme of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs). In these contexts, ‘leaving no one behind’ means ending extreme poverty 
in all its forms, and reducing inequalities among both individuals (vertical) and groups 
(horizontal).85 This in turn means addressing the underlying drivers of vulnerability. 
Humanitarian actors can contribute to this, for example through improving prepared-
ness to disasters, ensuring that their interventions also consider long-term impacts and 
working with governments to change policies, in particular to reduce future risks, and in 
settings of conflict and violence contributing to peace-building. According to OCHA, leave 
no one behind ‘calls on humanitarians locally, nationally, and internationally to work 
differently with one another and with counterparts in development, peace operations, 
climate change, and gender equality to move people out of crisis: reducing vulnerability, 
doubling down on risk management, and tackling root causes of crises and conflict’.86
1.4.2 An assets-based understanding of vulnerability87 
Vulnerability may be obvious, such as being made homeless from a disaster. It may 
also be hidden, such as trauma or depression stemming from experiences of crises or their 
consequences, for instance being forcibly displaced. Common forms of vulnerability include:
•	
Being unable to meet basic needs, such as shelter, water and food.
•	
Having little or no social capital, such as friends, family or social networks (see the 
example from Dhaka in Box 1.13).
83	  IFRC, World Disasters Report: Leaving No One Behind (Geneva: IFRC, 2018) (http://media.ifrc.org/ifrc/wp-content/
uploads/sites/5/2018/10/B-WDR-2018-EN-LR.pdf), p. 85.
84	  UN-Habitat, ‘New Urban Agenda’ (http://habitat3.org/the-new-urban-agenda/), 2016, p. 7.
85	  S. Stuart and E. Sammon, Defining ‘Leave No One Behind’, ODI Briefing Note (London: ODI, 2017) (https://www.odi.
org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-documents/11809.pdf), p. 1.
86	  OCHA and CDA, Leaving No One Behind: Humanitarian Effectiveness in the Age of the Sustainable Development 
Goals, 2016, p. 5. 
87	  See Section 1.1 on ways of seeing the city for a further discussion of assets and vulnerability.


===== PAGE 56 =====
046    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Being unable to access goods and services, often through lack of money but also as a 
result of disability or social or legal exclusion.
•	
Being discriminated against, for example being denied access to a particular building 
for belonging to the ‘wrong’ social grouping.
In cities, the groups most vulnerable to crises include those that are unable to access goods, 
services and opportunities due to their age, ability/disability or from social and/or legal exclusion:
•	
Those alienated by wider society, for instance convicted criminals, people who are 
mentally ill, people with a sexually-transmitted disease such as HIV or people facing 
stigma, such as LGBTQ+ people. 
•	
Children (see Section 4.7 on protection).
•	
The physically frail, including older and infirm people, and those living with 
disabilities (see the example below and later examples in this section).
•	
Irregular migrants, including those who have been trafficked or held in modern slavery.
•	
Members of social or religious groups despised or victimised by more powerful groups 
(although there is evidence of reduced vulnerability when belonging to a group).
•	
Those whose asylum status has been denied, and who as a consequence end up in a 
state of limbo and thus open to exploitation by employers and landlords, or who lack 
the paperwork to access services such as healthcare.
1.4.3 Vulnerability and poverty
There is an established correlation between poverty and vulnerability – the poorest are almost 
always the most vulnerable. This challenge is set to grow: by 2030, an estimated 325 million 
people classed as extreme poor will be living in the 49 countries most prone to disasters.88
88	  Andrew Shepherd et al., The Geography of Poverty, Disasters and Climate Extremes in 2030, ODI, Met Office and RMS, 
October 2013.
Source: IFRC, World Disasters Report: Leaving No One Behind (Geneva: IFRC, 2018) (http://media.ifrc.org/ifrc/wp-
content/uploads/sites/5/2018/10/B-WDR-2018-EN-LR.pdf), p. 92.
Box 1.12  Older people and disaster risk  
Disasters disproportionately affect older people. For example, while people over 60 
made up just 8% of the population, they accounted for 29% of fatalities in the 2015 Nepal 
earthquakes. In Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines, 38% of fatalities were over 60, while 
the over-60s accounted for only 7% of the population. Globally, the situation is expected 
to get worse: by 2100, 22% of the world’s population – around 2.5 billion people – are 
expected to be over 60, compared to 7% currently.


===== PAGE 57 =====
Context    |    047
Chapter 1
Not all vulnerable people are poor – those caught up in ethnic conflict may find little 
protection from being well-off, while violent crime may specifically target wealthier people. 
A number of those killed in Ahmedabad during the Gujarat earthquake89 in 2001 were wealthy 
people90 living in a modern building that collapsed.91 Conversely, people and households may 
have forms of compensation through social networks or other means that make them less 
vulnerable than their seemingly equally poor neighbours.
89   World Bank, Dhaka: Improving Living Conditions for the Urban Poor (Washington DC: World Bank, 2006), p. 10.	
90   D. Narayan and P. Petesch, Voices of the Poor: Crying Out for a Change (Washington DC: World Bank, 2000) 
(http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPOVERTY/Resources/335642-1124115102975/1555199-1124115201387/cry.pdf), 
pp. 120–21.
91	  Saeed Khan, ‘2001 Gujarat Earthquake: Builder and Architect Acquitted in Paldi Building Collapse Case’, Times of 
India, 1 October 2014 (https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ahmedabad/2001-Gujarat-earthquake-Builder-
architect-acquitted-in-Paldi-building-collapse-case/articleshow/43979325.cms).
Source: D. Sanderson, ‘Building Livelihoods of the Most Marginalised in Urban Areas: Strategic Approaches from Dhaka’, 
Environmental Hazards, 11(2), January 2012 (https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17477891.2011.609881).
Box 1.13  Who are the most vulnerable in urban Bangladesh? 
Dhaka’s ‘hated poor’  
‘A 2005 World Bank participatory study of slums in Dhaka asked poorer people to 
rank their perceptions of poverty. They identified three groups: less poor, more poor, 
and poorest.91 The latter was defined as those who “do not have regular income and 
are extremely vulnerable”. Characteristics include: beggars, widows, elderly and the 
disabled; female-headed households with small children without any male support; no 
secure income (e.g. erratic employment, daily labourers, begging); have one meal a day 
(if lucky); and, are more dependent on others.
‘In several communities, poor people are further divided92 into three subcategories 
that describe their ill-being: the social poor, the helpless poor, and the hated or bottom 
poor. The helpless poor are identifiable by their old clothes and pained faces. They 
can afford neither health care nor education for their children. In urban contexts, this 
group is referred to as the “hard-core poor”. “Most of them are widows, separated, or 
have husbands with ill health”, say women. The women also say that the hard-core poor 
often beg, have no reliable income, and live in sublet rooms and tin shacks. Disabled 
people are also among the hated poor. Members of these households often starve. 
Lacking land and other assets, they do not have access to loans, even from family or 
friends. In addition, they are not accepted as members of local organizations, and thus 
cannot benefit from group assistance as a last resort.’


===== PAGE 58 =====
048    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
For further discussion of poverty and vulnerability, see T. Fujii, Concepts and Measurement of 
Vulnerability to Poverty and Other Issues: A Review of Literature, ADBI Working Paper 611 (Tokyo: 
Asian Development Bank Institute, 2016) (https://www.adb.org/publications/concepts-and-
measurement-vulnerability-poverty).
1.5 Urban actors
Cities are by their nature home to a wide diversity of people and groups, many of whom 
may well become involved in crises – and crisis response – in a variety of ways. This section 
identifies the different actors that engage in crises. It identifies categories of urban actors 
and their facets. It discusses four groups: government at its different levels, emergent 
(voluntary) groups, businesses and the informal sector. 
This section closely aligns to others describing how different actors engage with one 
another. Section 2.1, on coordination, discusses how different actors co-exist and work 
Source: https://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/gender-disability-and-displacement-reflections-from-research-on-syrian-
refugees-in-jordan/.
Box 1.14  Extract from ‘Gender, Disability and Displacement: 
Reflections from Research on Syrian Refugees in Jordan’, 
by Bushra Rehman
‘I’m introduced to a 60 year old Syrian refugee, who welcomes me into her fourth storey 
home. There’s no lift so I climb up the stairs, with some difficulty, to her apartment where 
I’m introduced to her children – three daughters and three sons, all of whom have physical 
and intellectual impairments. A range of environmental barriers in their local community, 
such as steep hills and staircases, restrict their capacity to move around, to easily access 
humanitarian services, to form communal relationships and as such, reinforce the sense of 
isolation that refugees are already facing.
‘These women face discrimination not only because of the negative social attitudes and 
stigma attached to disability, but also because of the pernicious inequalities associated 
with being a woman, adding further susceptibility to violence and discrimination which 
inhibits their access to education, work, community spaces and activities. At the same 
time, they felt as though the “de-gendering” effects of disability prevented them from 
fulfilling socially-important gender roles, such as being a mother or a wife. Indeed, 
historically, disabled women have been subjected to cultural stereotypes which view 
them as asexual, unfit to reproduce and dependent’.


===== PAGE 59 =====
Context    |    049
Chapter 1
with one another; Section 1.2.2, on violence, discusses gangs; Section 1.1 looks at different 
ways of understanding the city and using a systems approach; Section 3.2 on area-based 
approaches (ABAs) describes how actors engage throughout the project management cycle; 
and Section 3.3 on cash concerns working with private sector organisations.
1.5.1 Categories of urban actors
There are a number of ways to categorise the wide diversity of actors present in the city. 
Figure 1.6 (page 050) identifies and organises different national actors according to three 
groupings: the public sector, the private sector and civil society.
International actors
International actors include:
•	
Donors (governments, collective fund-raising entities, individual groups).
•	
UN organisations.
•	
The Red Cross/Red Crescent: ICRC (in cases of conflict) and IFRC.
•	
International NGOs.
•	
Private sector organisations involved in recovery and reconstruction and private 
security.
•	
Search and rescue teams.
•	
Faith-based organisations.
•	
Interested individuals.
Government
Governments at their various levels are inevitably critical actors. National governments 
set national policies and may intervene in the aftermath of large-scale disasters. City 
governments are charged with municipal management. This is particularly important in 
post-disaster recovery, and in the provision of services to displaced people. A recurring 
theme throughout this Good Practice Review is the need for stronger coordination with 
local government in particular, and within local government departments, for example 
planning departments (see Section 2.1 on coordination). 
For a discussion of different actors in relation to forced displacement, see J. Basedow, 
C. Westrope and A. Meaux, Urban Stakeholder Engagement and Coordination: Guidance Note 
for Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/10821IIED.pdf).


===== PAGE 60 =====
050    |    Disaster Risk Reduction
Figure 1.6 Actors in the city
National government
–	 line ministries
International firms
Gangs
Law enforcement, 
police, militaries
Hawkers, market 
traders
Diaspora
Social services, hospitals, 
nurses, doctors
Small and medium-sized 
businesses, employers
CSOs and CBOs, charities, 
national and local RCRC 
societies
Schools, school councils, 
teachers
Landlords/owners/renters, 
housing associations
Religious authorities, 
faith-based organisations
Regional government
Black markets
Municipal government
–	 line ministries
Labour networks/unions/guilds, 
emplyees, seasonal workers
Traditional authorities, elders, 
traditional healers, tribal/ethnic 
group leaders, influential families
Judicial and penal actors
Service/utility providers 
(water, transportation, etc.), 
healthcare providers
Media institutions, 
newspapers, radio
Emergency services 
(fire, ambulance)
Media groups and 
news organisations
Community/
grassroots media
Political parties
Chambers of commerce, 
business associations
Youth groups, women’s 
groups, marginalised groups
Local development 
councils
Finance institutions, 
banks, lenders, treasury
Sports and leisure groups
Public 
sector
Private
sector
Civil 
society
Source: L. Campbell, Stepping Back: Understanding Cities and Their Systems (London: ALNAP, 2016) (www.alnap.org/
help-library/stepping-back-understanding-cities-and-their-systems), p. 41.


===== PAGE 61 =====
Context    |    051
Chapter 1
For tools for and approaches to engaging with city planners in urban displacement, 
see IRC, From Response to Resilience: Working with Cities and City Plans to Address Urban 
Displacement (London: IRC, 2018) (https://www.rescue.org/report/response-resilience-
working-cities-and-city-plans-address-urban-displacement).
Emergent (volunteer) groups 
Recent research has categorised people who organise themselves after a disaster as 
‘emergent groups’.92 Emergent groups are people who come together, often spontaneously, 
immediately after a disaster to perform first aid and provide water, food, warmth and 
shelter. Emergent groups may themselves be affected by disaster. Such groups may 
disappear as spontaneously as they appear (though not always, as illustrated below). A key 
point to note is that emergent groups are voluntary.93 Membership is constantly changing; 
they form and disband quickly, there is usually little or no clarity on leadership, and the 
focus of work is usually short-term (on immediate needs), rather than long-term. 
Depending on the crisis, the activities of emergent groups may be on a large scale. For 
example, following the 1999 earthquake in north-eastern Turkey ‘relief and rescue activities 
were carried out mainly by neighbours, relatives, spontaneously formed volunteer groups 
and some NGOs’.94 One survey found that ‘34 per cent of earthquake victims interviewed 
said that they received most help immediately after the earthquake from family members 
and neighbours, as well as through their own efforts; only 10.3 per cent mentioned help from 
state authorities’. 
92	  J. Twigg and I. Mosel, ‘Emergent Groups and Spontaneous Volunteers in Urban Disaster Response’, Environment & 
Urbanization 29 (2): 443–58 (http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0956247817721413 ).
93	  A discussion of the scale and nature of voluntary-led actions in relation to refugee movements in Europe is 
provided in J. Borton, ‘The Humanitarian Impulse: Alive and Well among the Citizens of Europe’, Humanitarian 
Exchange 67, September 2016 (https://odihpn.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/HE-67-FINAL.pdf).
94	  Ibid.
Source: Patrick Daly et al., ‘Situating Local Stakeholders within National Disaster Governance Structures: Rebuilding 
Urban Neighbourhoods Following the 2015 Nepal Earthquake’, Environment and Urbanization 29(2), 2017.
Box 1.15  Actors after the Nepal earthquakes  
Following the earthquakes that struck Nepal in 2015, a study of five urban settlements 
found that actors engaged in immediate relief comprised a combination of 
neighbourhood residents, NGOs and local civil society organisations. Activities included 
rubble clearance and repairs to infrastructure and buildings. The study found that 
‘Lacking support from the government’s National Reconstruction Authority, all five 
settlements drew on informal governance structures to form community reconstruction 
and planning committees and collaborative relationships with NGOs and other 
organisations, loosely coordinated with local government’.


===== PAGE 62 =====
052    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Businesses 
Private sector organisations or businesses (defined here as for-profit organisations or 
individuals) are major actors in cities. They range from multinationals with headquarters 
in cities to small and medium-sized businesses. They also include people working in the 
informal sector. 
The role of businesses during and after crises is wide-ranging and varied, from post-disaster 
reconstruction and supplying goods to security contracting and providing IT. Businesses 
can be vital and high-profile: following the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the mobile phone 
company Digicel was instrumental in the rebuilding of the iconic Iron Market in Port-au-
Prince. Research following the earthquake concluded that ‘Increasing collaboration between 
the private sector, humanitarian organisations and governments in order to scale up and 
better tackle urban post disaster recovery using a fundamentally “private approach” offers 
opportunities for more effective responses for the next urban disaster’.95
Recent research finds that the ‘greatest direct contribution [of businesses] has come in the 
form of new technologies and other innovations and the sharing of technical capacities in 
areas such as logistics, telecommunications and cash transfers. In addition, businesses, 
as seen in the growth of social enterprises, are increasingly developing models which are 
commercial in nature but which ultimately help to meet humanitarian needs and reduce 
vulnerability to future disasters’.96 The same research also identified the benefits of and 
barriers to private sector engagement for humanitarian action, which are summarised below:
Benefits
•	
Speed/timeliness
•	
Coverage
•	
Durability
•	
Value for money
•	
Innovation and transformation.
Barriers 
•	
Few community-wide interlocutors
•	
Limited forums for interaction
95	  D. Smith, ‘Petty Trade and the Private Sector in Urban Reconstruction: Learning from Haiti’s Post-earthquake Iron 
Market’, in D. Sanderson, J. Kayden and J. Leis, Urban Disaster Resilience: New Dimensions from International Practice in 
the Built Environment (New York: Routledge, 2016), p. 167.
96	  S. Zyck and R. Kent, Humanitarian Crises, Emergency Preparedness and Response: The Role of Business and the 
Private Sector (London: ODI, 2014) (http://www.urbanresponse.org/resource/19404).


===== PAGE 63 =====
Context    |    053
Chapter 1
•	
Limited awareness of novel partnerships
•	
Lack of clarity in decision-making
•	
Partnerships remain at headquarters level
•	
Aid agency vetting (due diligence) requirements.
Actors in the informal economy
The informal sector often accounts for an enormous portion of economic activity in many 
cities in low- and middle-income countries. For instance, in sub-Saharan Africa the Inter-
national Labour Organization estimates that over 66% of people work in the urban informal 
sector.97 
The informal sector, crises and disasters are closely linked. High inflation and unemploy-
ment during conflict can lead to a growth in the informal sector, which might provide one 
of the few sources of affordable goods and food. Usually, as conflicts continue, and in post-
conflict settings, the informal economy expands to provide livelihood opportunities to 
vulnerable people, such as selling items of food and clothing, or selling their labour. 
Opportunities for humanitarian agencies to engage with actors in the informal economy are 
often not taken up, except perhaps via links with local NGOs and civil society organisations. 
One reason for this is that informal actors are by definition considered to be outside the 
formal system. For example, people squatting on public land may be prevented from getting 
help from agencies engaged in shelter recovery, since those agencies may be unable to secure 
the necessary government permissions to build in such locations. This is a significant issue 
given the large numbers of people living in informal urban settlements (see Sections 4.1 and 
4.2 on housing, land and property rights and shelter and settlements for further discussion). 
Yet there are opportunities for engagement: informal markets, for instance, are often up 
and running immediately after a disaster, given that people need to buy and sell goods to 
survive.98 Assistance may also be provided to communities who relocate in new areas (see the 
Canaan example following the Haiti earthquake, in Section 4.2 on shelter and settlements).
97	  ILO, ‘Five Facts about Informal Economy in Africa’ (http://www.ilo.org/addisababa/whats-new/WCMS_377286/
lang--en/index.htm).
98	   C. Clermont, D. Sanderson, H. Spraos and A. Sharma, Urban Disasters: Lessons from Haiti. Study of Member 
Agencies’ Responses to the Earthquake in Port au Prince, Haiti (London: Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC), 2010) 
(https://www.alnap.org/help-library/urban-disasters-%E2%80%93-lessons-from-haiti-study-of-member-
agencies%E2%80%99-responses-to-the).


===== PAGE 64 =====
054    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts


===== PAGE 65 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    055
Chapter 2
Themes and issues
2.1 Coordination
Humanitarian coordination can be defined as ‘the systematic use of policy instruments 
to deliver humanitarian assistance in a cohesive and effective manner. Such instruments 
include strategic planning, gathering data and managing information, mobilising resources 
and ensuring accountability, orchestrating a functional division of labour, negotiating 
and maintaining a serviceable framework with host political authorities and providing 
leadership’.1
The subject of humanitarian coordination has been widely written about and studied. This 
section focuses on urban issues associated with coordination. It discusses coordination 
with city authorities and steps for engaging with them in planning processes. It reviews 
coordination with emergent (voluntary) groups and gangs, as two examples of particularly 
urban phenomena. It reviews cluster coordination in urban areas. 
2.1.1 Levels of coordination
Recent research2 into organisations engaged in emergencies identifies three levels of 
coordination: communication, where information and knowledge is shared between 
organisations; alignment, where organisations ‘may adjust their activities to create a more 
effective response on the basis of the activities of other organisations’, for example ensuring 
they work in different neighbourhoods; and collaboration, where organisations may have 
common goals and share activities.
In urban areas there are of course a wide range and diversity of stakeholders (see Section 
1.5 on actors), many with competing interests and different degrees of power and 
legitimacy. While humanitarian coordination is often with national government structures, 
local government bodies are essential stakeholders. Coordinating with local government 
may not always be possible, particularly in situations of conflict or immediately after 
1	
 L. Minear et al., UN Coordination of the International Humanitarian Response to the Gulf Crisis 1990–1992 
(Providence, RI: Thomas J. Watson Institute for International Studies, 1992) (https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/
files/resources/A62BFF27BE6837F6C1256C2500535B54-coordination_brown_jul2000.pdf), cited in N. Reindorp and P. 
Wiles, Humanitarian Coordination: Lessons from Recent Field Experience, 2001 (https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/
files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/4186.pdf), p. ii.
2	
 P. Knox Clarke and L. Campbell, Exploring Coordination in Humanitarian Clusters (London: ALNAP, 2015) 
(https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/update-exploring-coordination-in-humanitarian-
clusters.pdf).
Chapter 2


===== PAGE 66 =====
056    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
a disaster, but international actors should never assume that local government is not 
functioning. Instead, they should make working with the city authorities the default, unless 
this proves impossible for reasons of government capacity or lack of neutrality.
2.1.2 Engaging with city authorities
Local government and its officials are essential actors in urban humanitarian response. Yet 
the humanitarian community has repeatedly been found wanting in how it engages with 
city authorities. One study of the response of 13 INGOs following Typhoon Haiyan in 2013 
found that, across the track of the typhoon, local government was largely bypassed by 
aid agencies, which worked directly at the community level.3 Following the 2010 Haiti 
earthquake, ‘local authorities … complained that three months after the earthquake they 
felt “like strangers in [their] own city”’.4 This is a particular problem in urban areas, where 
meaningful action often relies on complex systems of governance. 
A wide-ranging study of cities and crises in 20165 found the following: 
•	
overwhelmed and under-resourced municipalities that also lacked expertise to deal 
with ‘the exponential needs resulting from crisis’;
•	
a failure by international agencies ‘to understand local dynamics and to engage with 
local stakeholders’;
•	
an approach that was sector-based rather than settlement-based; and 
•	
a ‘lack of city-level multi-stakeholder coordination mechanisms’, contributing to ‘the 
divergence between international and local actors’.
The report found that these problems led to a sub-optimal response (for example bad 
targeting and duplication), undermined local systems and fuelled community tensions (for 
example in not consulting with all actors, leading to perceptions of bias). Failing to engage 
with municipal authorities can also mean that short-term emergency interventions in areas 
such as shelter and settlement, WASH and public health fail to articulate with – and even set 
back – longer-term development planning. 
Research by ALNAP emphasises that working with government structures is a necessity, 
not a choice: ‘in many situations there are possibilities to work closely with line ministries 
3	
 D. Sanderson and Z. Delica Willisen, Philippines Typhoon Haiyan Response Review, 2014 (https://www.alnap.org/
system/files/content/resource/files/main/dec-hc-haiyan-review-report-2014.pdf), p. 15.
4	
 Francois Grünewald et al., Real-time Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Supported by DG ECHO in Haiti, 2009–2011 
(Plaisian: Groupe URD, November 2010–April 2011).
5	
 IMPACT and UCLG, Consultations on Humanitarian Responses in Urban Areas: Perspectives from Cities in Crisis, World 
Humanitarian Summit, 2016 (https://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/cities_in_crisis.pdf). 


===== PAGE 67 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    057
Chapter 2
or other parts of government, even where the government is engaged in internal conflicts. 
Where even this is not possible, coordination models should be designed to align with 
government structures to the degree possible, to allow for government ownership at a later 
date’.6
Humanitarian organisations’ roles may therefore need to shift – ‘depending on the 
capacity of the local authorities, the humanitarians’ role may be more about facilitation 
and enabling than direct service provision’.7 However, engagement with authorities can 
often be sensitive, particularly in conflict situations. Where authorities are partisan or may 
be the aggressors, engagement may not be possible, as is evident in the example from 
Mogadishu in Box 2.1. 
2.1.3 Engaging with local authorities 
From its work in urban areas,8 IRC identifies the following key steps for establishing urban 
partnerships: 
6	
 Knox Clarke and Campbell, Exploring Coordination in Humanitarian Clusters, p. 7.
7	
 B. Mountfield, Using the Sphere Standards in Urban Settings (Geneva: The Sphere Project, 2016) 
(www.sphereproject.org/silo/files/using-the-sphere-standards-in-urban-settings.pdf), p. 11.
8	
 IRC, From Response to Resilience. Working with Cities and City Plans to Address Urban Displacement: Lessons from 
Amman and Kampala (New York: IRC, 2018) (https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/document/2424/
fromresponsetoresiliencefinalweb.pdf), p. 37.
Source: F. Grünewald, ‘Aid in a City at War: The Case of Mogadishu, Somalia’, Disasters 36(1), July 2012 
(https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/toc/14677717/36/s1).
Box 2.1  Relations between humanitarian actors and municipal 
authorities in Mogadishu  
‘One of the main conceptual difficulties for aid actors has been to approach Mogadishu 
as a city and not as a classic humanitarian situation. This requires strategic sector-
based coordination linked to administrative units rather than cluster-type sector-
based coordination, and, above all, an attempt to engage with urban authorities. 
While some of the NGOs working in Mogadishu have tried to establish Memoranda of 
Understanding with the Ministry of Health, they have bypassed the municipal level and 
gone down to the district commissioner level, which is responsible only for law-and-
order control functions rather than urban planning. The reasons why there has not 
been any engagement with municipal authorities include the fear of politicisation, the 
risk of corruption; and, more broadly, ignorance about their roles, if not reluctance to 
work with these urban actors.’


===== PAGE 68 =====
058    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Begin a dialogue with local municipal authorities to identify opportunities for 
collaboration around shared outcomes.
•	
Determine whether a master plan exists, and other relevant documentation and 
policies.
•	
Identify the interests and incentives of all stakeholders (including the authorities).
•	
Ensure that all actors are operating based on the same information, including where 
necessary information on humanitarian approaches.
•	
Ensure as far as possible effective coordination between all stakeholders, including 
local authorities, NGOs, faith-based organisations and the private sector.
•	
Link all recovery actions to long-term developmental approaches, strategies and 
goals. 
Another collaborative planning approach developed by ACTED and IMPACT is AGORA, 
which aims to provide ‘predictable capacity to localise aid action and promote efficient, 
inclusive and integrated local planning and service delivery in contexts of crisis’.9 AGORA 
uses a settlements-based approach (see Section 3.2 on area-based approaches). For 
further information see http://www.impact-initiatives.org/agora. The ‘local generalist 
approach’ seeks to support city authorities by providing financial and technical assis-
tance. For further information, see http://www.cites-unies-france.org/Local-Authorities-
in-Crisis.
9	
 See http://www.impact-initiatives.org/agora. 
Box 2.2  Using area-based approaches to improve coordination in 
Mafraq, Jordan   
The Community Engagement Project, which works in Mafraq in Jordan and in a number 
of other countries, seeks to improve coordination between local government, NGOs and 
CBOs in efforts to build social cohesion. The vehicle for this has been through enacting 
an area-based approach (see Section 3.2 for further discussion). Joint activities 
between actors and communities have included assessments and stakeholder mapping 
of key capacities. 
For further discussion of this initiative, and for additional examples from Bangui, Bogo, 
Gaziantep, Port-au-Prince and Tacloban, see IMPACT and UCLG, Consultations on 
Humanitarian Responses in Urban Areas: Perspectives from Cities in Crisis, World 
Humanitarian Summit, 2016 (https://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/cities_in_crisis.pdf).


===== PAGE 69 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    059
2.1.4 Engaging with emergent (voluntary) groups
While not exclusively an urban phenomenon, the scope and range of emergent groups 
(introduced and discussed in Section 1.5 on actors) in cities is particularly noticeable. 
However, aid organisations can find it difficult to meaningfully engage with these groups. 
According to one study: ‘the core problem is that emergency planners and plans rarely take 
emergent groups and spontaneous volunteering into account. They do not understand the 
nature and characteristics of emergence or the strong motivations behind it. Emergence 
is an implicit challenge to the “command and control” approach of most official disaster 
management and emergency response agencies, with their top-down bureaucratic systems 
and standard operating procedures’.10 The study also gives an example of more successful 
coordination: ‘in the Kobe earthquake, initial problems regarding duplication of effort were 
overcome by creating an umbrella group, the Nishinomiya Volunteer Network, to coordinate 
the work of emergent groups and collaborate with the government on distributing food and 
other goods, collecting information about survivors’ needs from temporary shelters, and 
liaising between survivors and government’.11
2.1.5 Engaging with gangs 
In urban areas, gangs or criminal elements will control some neighbourhoods, raising 
questions about how or whether humanitarian organisations should engage with them. 
ALNAP observes that ‘Any work carried out by humanitarian players in a city neighbour-
hood, or in an area within a prison, that is controlled by a gang will be subject to discussion 
or authorisation by the gang, whether one is aware of it or not’. One programming consider-
ation here is how far to engage with gang leaders.12 ALNAP’s study cites research on the 
ICRC’s experience,13 and notes ‘the need to gain acceptance from gang leaders, given that 
many gangs are hierarchically organised; also that gang leaders need to perceive some 
benefit from the organisation’s operation’.14 See also Section 1.2.2 on urban violence.
10	  J. Twigg and I. Mosel, ‘Emergent Groups and Spontaneous Volunteers in Urban Disaster Response’, Environment & 
Urbanization 29(2) (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0956247817721413), p. 452.
11	  Ibid., p. 454.
12	  D. Sanderson and P. Knox Clarke, ALNAP Lessons. Responding to Urban Disasters: Learning from Previous Relief 
and Recovery Operations (London: ALNAP, 2012) (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/
alnap-lessons-urban-web.pdf), p. 19.
13	  E. Ferris, Urban Disasters, Conflict and Violence: Implications for Humanitarian Work (Washington DC: Brookings 
Institution, 2012) (https://www.brookings.edu/on-the-record/urban-disasters-conflict-and-violence-implications-for-
humanitarian-work/).
14	  Sanderson and Knox Clarke, ALNAP Lessons, p. 19.


===== PAGE 70 =====
060    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
2.1.6 The cluster approach and urban response
The cluster approach, introduced into humanitarian action as part of the 2005 Humanitarian 
Reform Agenda, is the internationally-accepted norm for organising aid support according 
to sectors, or clusters. The Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC)15 describes key cluster 
functions as supporting service delivery, informing strategic decision-making, planning and 
strategy development, advocacy, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the 
cluster strategy, contingency planning, preparedness and capacity-building, and integrating 
early recovery from the outset of the humanitarian response.
ALNAP’s research into organisations engaged in emergencies (referred to above) found 
that ‘overwhelmingly, Cluster activities fall at the “alignment” level’. This is especially 
true where competing interests, stresses and pressures call on different organisations to 
make careful calculations on where and how to align their efforts. Other factors include 
workflows, policies and institutional cultures; the capacity and willingness of local 
government and local civil society to be involved and/or lead coordination; and what level 
of coordination is being attempted. That said, coordination in disasters and crises is an 
essential element of any successful intervention. 
While the cluster system overall has improved coordination and information-sharing,16 it 
has been problematic in urban areas. As the IRC observes: ‘The traditional cluster system 
does not lend itself to the complexity of needs, services and systems across an urban 
landscape with humanitarian agencies struggling to deal with the complexity, density and 
built environment of towns and cities or [un]able to take full advantage of the potential 
a city has to offer’.17 The IASC has challenged the very validity of the cluster approach in 
urban recovery operations: ‘the current cluster system is structured around sectors of 
expertise and sectorial coordination, while in a context of urban crises there might be 
a need to identify and respond holistically to multi-sectorial needs in a given territory, 
requiring stronger inter-cluster linkages and coordination at city-level’.18
For clusters to work well in urban areas, the following should be noted:
15	  IASC, Reference Module for Cluster Coordination at the Country Level, 2012, cited in Knox Clarke and Campbell, 
Exploring Coordination in Humanitarian Clusters, p. 20.
16	  See for example V. Humphries, Improving Humanitarian Coordination: Common Challenges and Lessons Learned 
from the Cluster Approach (Medford, MA: Tufts University, 2013) (http://sites.tufts.edu/jha/archives/1976). See also 
Knox Clarke and Campbell, Exploring Coordination in Humanitarian Clusters.
17	  IRC, Humanitarian Crises in Urban Areas: Are Area-Based Approaches to Programming and Coordination the Way 
Forward? (New York, IRC, 2015) (http://www.syrialearning.org/resource/21830) p. 5.
18	  IASC, Guidance Note for Improving Coordination and Responses to Urban Crises in the Humanitarian Programme 
Cycle through the IASC and its Cluster System, IASC Working Document, 2016, p. 1.


===== PAGE 71 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    061
•	
Leadership by local government is important, to avoid creating parallel structures 
which remove ownership from existing governance structures.
•	
Cross-sectoral coordination is vital: single-sector interventions that do not recognise 
urban complexity risk causing harm (a systems perspective on how cities work, 
described in Section 1.1, is a useful starting-point here). 
•	
Meeting locations and the frequency of meetings in cities are important. Traffic jams 
in congested areas can waste time and cluster members might not bother to attend 
meetings. In Port-au-Prince after the 2010 earthquake, chronic traffic jams and the 
location of cluster meetings on the outskirts of the city meant that several hours a 
day could be spent in a vehicle.19
•	
Many NGOs may find it difficult to attend a large number of meetings, especially if an 
organisation is involved in more than one sector.
•	
Language is an important consideration – default English in a non-English- speaking 
location alienates local bodies and discourages engagement.
•	
Many local stakeholders may well not attend cluster meetings, for instance private 
sector organisations or gangs. Other ways of engaging them are therefore needed.
Concerning cross-sector coordination, the IASC20 has discussed adopting a city-level inter-
cluster working group (led by city authorities wherever possible) that ‘would support 
stronger coordination among sectors and with local actors’. An important opportunity for 
cross-sectoral coordination lies in conducting multi-sectoral assessments. This is discussed 
further in Section 3.6 on assessments.
2.2 Corruption
Humanitarian response to disasters and conflict is carried out in areas where risks are 
high, where there may well be endemic poverty and where governance structures are 
usually weak and public institutions overwhelmed and under-resourced, often prior to the 
emergency. Humanitarian operations therefore almost by definition take place in areas 
where there is corruption. This, arguably, is compounded in cities with extremes of wealth 
and poverty, where public institutions are based, and where cash, markets and competition 
are concentrated. 
19	  C. Clermont et al., Urban Disasters: Lessons from Haiti. Study of Member Agencies’ Responses to the Earthquake in 
Port au Prince, Haiti, January 2010 (London: Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC), 2011) (https://www.alnap.org/help-
library/urban-disasters-%E2%80%93-lessons-from-haiti-study-of-member-agencies%E2%80%99-responses-to-the).
20	  IASC, Guidance Note, p. 3.


===== PAGE 72 =====
062    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
This review found little information specific to urban areas, though there are examples 
relating to building practices, and efforts to combat corruption within humanitarian 
operations are equally applicable to both rural and urban contexts. This section looks at 
corruption risks within humanitarian aid operations, and good practice in reducing them.
2.2.1 Defining corruption
Transparency International (TI) defines corruption as ‘the abuse of entrusted power for 
private gain’.21 ‘Private gain’ here may not only be financial: transactional sex, for instance, 
fits this definition. Other non-financial forms of corruption include the diversion of 
humanitarian assistance to benefit non-target groups, coercion and intimidation of staff or 
beneficiaries to participate in corruption and preferential treatment for friends or relatives 
in recruitment and assistance processes.22 Corruption is complex and differs in different 
contexts – in some societies, what elsewhere may be perceived as cronyism and nepotism 
can be widely accepted.
A recent review of corruption in emergencies notes that it is ‘hard to measure and 
difficult to separate from other issues, such as excessive political influence and economic 
mismanagement … In essence, corruption subverts public resources for private gain, to the 
damage of the body politic and people at large. It is often associated with political violence 
and authoritarianism and is a highly exploitative phenomenon’.23 
2.2.2 Corruption and naturally-triggered disasters
Research indicates a strong link between disasters and corruption. One study found that ‘83% 
of all deaths from building collapse in earthquakes over the past 30 years occurred in countries 
that are anomalously corrupt’.24 Other research documents how ‘corruption linked to poor 
planning and regulation, unauthorised structures and inadequate municipal management 
presents major impediments to creating disaster resilience in Sri Lankan cities’.25
21	  Transparency International, Preventing Corruption in Humanitarian Operations (Berlin: Transparency 
International, 2014) (https://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/preventing_corruption_in_humanitarian_
operations).
22	  Ibid.
23	  D. Alexander, ‘Corruption and the Governance of Disaster Risk’, Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Natural Hazard 
Science, 2017 (http://oxfordre.com/naturalhazardscience/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199389407.001.0001/acrefore-
9780199389407-e-253). 
24	  N. Ambrasays and R. Bilham, ‘Corruption Kills’, Nature, 469, 13 January 2011 (https://www.nature.com/
articles/469153a).
25	  A. Williams and K. Dupuy, Corruption and the City: How Aid Donors Can Support Integrity Building in Urban 
Spaces, U4 Brief, CMI (https://www.u4.no/publications/corruption-and-the-city).


===== PAGE 73 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    063
Chapter 2
A review of corruption and disasters26 concluded that:
Organized crime tends to look upon disaster as an opportunity. Reconstruction usually 
involves a building boom, which attracts mafia interests in the construction industries. 
Often, the process is not well regulated, in part because the desire to complete the process 
quickly prevails over the need to work methodically. Mafias can activate their contacts in 
government and public administration to expedite their involvement. The interference of 
organized crime in the construction industry tends to affect reconstruction phases by the 
neglect of building codes and quality assurance.
Besides involvement in reconstruction, disruption may lead to an increase in other harmful 
activities, including people trafficking, abduction, modern slavery such as forced prostitution 
and the drug trade.
2.2.3 Corruption in humanitarian operations
Corruption within humanitarian operations is particularly ugly. As TI puts it: ‘In the case 
of humanitarian assistance, resources have been entrusted to organisations – including 
national and local governments, inter-governmental organisations, NGOs and local 
communities – specifically for alleviating the suffering of people affected by crises and 
restoring their dignity’.27 The arrival of humanitarian resources in resource-poor countries 
26	  D. Alexander, ‘Corruption and the Governance of Disaster Risk’, Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Natural Hazard 
Science, 2017 (http://oxfordre.com/naturalhazardscience/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199389407.001.0001/acrefore-
9780199389407-e-253).
27	  Transparency International, Preventing Corruption in Humanitarian Operations.
Source: The Guardian, 7 May 2009. A detailed case study is provided in I. Davis and D. Alexander, Recovery from 
Disaster (London: Routledge, 2015), pp. 48–51.
Box 2.3  Poor construction in the Sichuan earthquake in China 
The Sichuan earthquake in China in 2008 killed some 87,150 people and left nearly 5 
million homeless. Around 1.5 million houses were destroyed and 6 million damaged. 
A number of newly-built schools collapsed, killing over 5,000 children. Corruption 
was widely reported in the building process, leading to buildings collapsing that 
should have stayed up. As one article noted: ‘The issue has been an enduring source 
of grief for parents. They say the schools crumbled so easily because corruption and 
mismanagement led to slipshod construction methods and weak buildings that were 
not up to standard. Some say materials meant for school construction projects were 
sold by contractors for personal gain’.


===== PAGE 74 =====
064    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
with weak institutions can exacerbate power asymmetries and increase corruption, 
thereby undermining the humanitarian mission. 
Factors that contribute to reducing the transparency and accountability of decision-making 
processes during humanitarian crises include:28
•	
The need for quick decisions, often with incomplete knowledge.
•	
The large amounts of incoming cash and other resources. 
•	
The need to recruit large numbers of people, often very quickly.
•	
The pressure to act fast and show results.
•	
The wide range of actors engaged in response operations (local, national and inter-
national NGOs, donors, the private sector, the government, affected communities).
•	
Unequal power distribution, for example between local and international NGOs, or 
between NGOs and affected people.
TI reports that corruption risks related to programme support functions are generally in 
relation to finance, supply chain management (for example procurement, transport and 
managing goods) and within human resources.29 Corruption risks also run through the 
implementation of programmes, for example in needs assessment and resource allocation, 
the selection of local partners, targeting and registering beneficiaries and programme 
monitoring and evaluation. Figure 2.1 maps assistance activities with possible corruption 
risks, all of which are applicable to urban contexts.30 
TI’s Collective Resolution for Enhanced Accountability and Transparency in Emergencies 
(CREATE) project aimed to ‘produce an evidence base concerning the risks on aid integrity, 
in particular corruption risks, as well as prevention and mitigation measures, in relation 
to the implementation of humanitarian assistance’. Examples were provided from four 
settings, in Afghanistan, the Ebola emergency in Guinea, southern Somalia and the Syrian 
refugee response in Lebanon. The project report, while not urban-specific, documents 
incidents of corruption, relating to different programming approaches.31 
28	  Drawn from E. Calossi, S. Sberna and A. Vannucc, ‘Disasters and Corruption, Corruption as Disaster’, in A. de Guttry 
et al. (eds), International Disaster Response Law (The Hague: Asser Press, 2012).
29	  Transparency International, Preventing Corruption in Humanitarian Operations.
30	  P. Ewins et al., Mapping the Risks of Corruption in Humanitarian Action (London: ODI, 2006) (https://www.odi.org/
sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/874.pdf), p. 7.
31	  The full report can be found at https://tikenya.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/CREATE_Synthesis-report_
formatted_final.pdf.


===== PAGE 75 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    065
Figure 2.1 Map of corruption risks in humanitarian emergencies
Source: P. Ewins et al., Mapping the Risks of Corruption in Humanitarian Action (London: ODI, 2006) 
(https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/874.pdf), p. 7.
Corruption risk example
–	 Elites bribe/influence those 
conducting the assessment 
to inflate needs and/or to 
favvour specific groups
–	 Response selected to 
enhance personal or 
organisational reputation 
rather than based on needs
–	 Double funding: allocating 
the same overhead 
expenditure to two or more 
projects
–	 Agency staff invent partners 
or demand kickbacks
–	 Goods which are sub-
standard or do not meet 
the original specification 
are accepted and ultimately 
paid for through kickbacks, 
bribes, collusion
–	 Powerful individuals within 
the community manipulate 
the beneficiary lists
–	 Beneficiaries have to bribe 
agency staff, local elites 
or authorities to maintain 
their place in a distribution 
line or receive goods
–	 Manipulation of monitoring 
reports/information to 
attract further resources
–	 Reports falsified to hide 
corruption
–	 Disposal of assets to 
favoured people
–	 Monitoring, reporting or 
evaluations falsified to hide 
evidence of corruption that 
was found
Key sections:
Shelter
Food and 
nutrition
Health care
Water and 
sanitation
Refugees/IDPS
Finance, personnel, administration
Project monitoring, reporting, 
evaluation and programme 
closure
Initial assessment, decision to 
repond and programme design
Fundraising and allocation of 
funding
Agreements to work with local 
organisations
Establishment/
scale-up of 
offices and 
operations
Targeting and registration of 
specific beneficiaries
Procurement and logistics
Implementation/distribution
Assistance process


===== PAGE 76 =====
066    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
TI’s 2014 handbook Preventing Corruption in Humanitarian Operations contains information 
and practical advice on tackling corruption within project support functions, for example 
in procurement, and throughout the project management cycle. Nonetheless, it is of great 
importance that the elimination of corruption and the formulation of anti-corruption 
policies remain context-specific. Often, policies and procedures to promote transparency, 
integrity and accountability are already in place in humanitarian agencies, and can serve as 
a starting-point to creating an organisational context that resists corruption. 
While the TI handbook does not distinguish between rural and urban locations, it is highly 
relevant to urban programming, especially the parts concerning project cycle management. 
Particularly relevant sections include operating in cash environments and using cash-based 
programming, and construction and reconstruction. For further guidance and practical 
information on combating corruption, see: https://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/
publication/preventing_corruption_in_humanitarian_operations. For other reports, case 
studies and guidance notes relating to corruption in humanitarian operations, see: 
https://www.transparency.org/search?topic=83.
2.3 Urban resilience
The concept of resilience has attracted substantial interest and momentum in recent years, 
and is now widely used within humanitarian and development practice. It is embodied in 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 9 and 11 (known as the ‘urban SDG’) concerning 
sustainable cities and communities.32 For many, resilience is a helpful concept, and a 
useful term that ties together actions both before and after a crisis. Building resilience is 
a proactive term that can galvanise action. For others, however, it does not go far enough 
in addressing systemic issues of vulnerability and inequality, and there are concerns that 
calling a community ‘resilient’ may imply that external help is not needed.33 
This section provides a definition of urban resilience and highlights some of its attributes. 
It presents an operational model of resilience. The section discusses applying the concept 
of resilience in urban areas. The section ends with sources of further information. Urban 
resilience has close links to a number of other sections in this review, including those on 
climate change and ways of seeing the city.
32	  See http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-development-goals/goal-11-sustainable-cities-and-
communities.html.
33	  This was the core of the criticism of government inaction following Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans. See M. 
Kaika, ‘“Don’t Call Me Resilient Again!” The New Urban Agenda as Immunology … or What Happens when 
Communities Refuse to be Vaccinated with “Smart Cities” and Indicators’, Environment and Urbanization, 29 (1), 2017 
(http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0956247816684763).


===== PAGE 77 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    067
Chapter 2
2.3.1 Defining resilience 
The concept of resilience has its roots in a number of disciplines, including engineering, 
psychology and ecology. In recent years, the concept has been used in a number of urban 
approaches, including 100 Resilient Cities – Pioneered by The Rockefeller Foundation, UNISDR’s 
Resilient Cities campaign34 and the Asian Cities Climate Change Resilience Network.35 
The definition from The Rockefeller Foundation, formulated from their extensive work in urban 
resilience, defines it as: ‘the capacity of individuals, communities, institutions, businesses, and 
systems within a city to survive, adapt, and grow no matter what kinds of chronic stresses and 
acute shocks they experience’.36 In practice, this means that, in order to build resilience:
•	
The key is to recognise and build upon existing capacities.
•	
Building capacity applies at different levels – individual, communities, institutions, 
businesses and systems.
•	
Resilience-building requires iterative approaches and investing in building relations 
and connections among city actors.
•	
Success relies on combinations of inclusive, people-centred approaches and under-
standing the complexities at a larger scale (such as thinking about systems).
•	
Restoring/building connections between different actors and layers is fundamental.
•	
It’s not just about relief but also, in programming terms, building preparedness (in 
order to survive), building flexibility and thinking in new ways (in order to adapt) and 
strong disaster risk reduction (DRR) measures (in order to grow).
•	
Implicit in growth is the idea that all preparedness, response, recovery and DRR 
measures combine to make urban areas stronger for the next crisis. So, in all actions, 
thought needs to be given to the next emergency as well.
•	
‘No matter what kind of chronic stresses’ (meaning ongoing threats, such as water 
shortages, violence and excessive heat) and acute shocks (such as earthquakes, 
conflict and floods) implies not just focusing on one threat, but considering the wider 
spectrum of risk.
A number of other layers and understandings can be added to this definition. For instance:
•	
Capacity is often described in terms of ‘adaptive capacity’ in relation to climate 
change and the need for individuals and institutions to adapt (see also Section 1.2.4 
34	  See https://www.unisdr.org/we/campaign/cities.
35	  See https://www.acccrn.net/.
36	  See http://www.100resilientcities.org/.


===== PAGE 78 =====
068    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
on climate change). Two other forms of capacity are anticipatory capacity, i.e. getting 
ready, and absorptive capacity, or the ability to recover.37 
1.	 Other definitions highlight the need for action before a disaster more prominently 
(for example IFRC’s definition,38 which adds the words ‘anticipate’ and ‘reduce the 
impact of’).
2.	 The term ‘bounce back’ (i.e. absorptive capacity) is often associated with 
understandings of resilience. This is from engineering, where bridges are designed 
to recover their shape after stresses are removed from them.
2.3.2 Models of resilience 
A number of resilience models are available – one recent review found 13 operational 
frameworks, indices and tools related to the concept.39 Examples include ISET’s 
frame-work 
for 
urban 
climate 
resilience 
(https://www.tandfonline.com/eprint/
VaVMpErdVGCNYa82jefg/full#.UxY8-ZGpd4M) and ARUP’s City Resilience Index, which 
seeks to quantify resilience according to infrastructure, health, economy and leadership 
(https://www.arup.com/projects/city-resilience-index). A third model used in relation to 
naturally-triggered disasters is ‘disaster resilience of place’ (DROP), which emphasises 
location in relation to resilience and vulnerability (see https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0959378008000666). A fourth model40 assesses the level of 
resilience in low-income urban settlements (http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/1517964/1/1-s2.0-
S2212420916300504-main.pdf). A fifth model, focusing on children, is Plan International’s 
Child-Centred Urban Resilience Framework (https://www.plan.org.au/-/media/plan/
documents/reports/curf_brochure2016v8.pdf).
The following model, from DFID, is presented here as it is readily understandable and is 
applicable to urban areas, for example in its emphasis on systems. 
37	  Taken collectively, these three forms of capacity (adaptive, anticipatory and absorptive) are sometimes referred to as 
the Three As. See for instance https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/9812.pdf.
38	  Resilience is ‘the ability of individuals, communities, organizations or countries exposed to disasters and crises 
and underlying vulnerabilities to anticipate, reduce the impact of, cope with, and recover from the effects of shocks 
and stresses without compromising their long-term prospects’. See D. Sanderson and A. Sharma (eds) IFRC World 
Disasters Report. Resilience: Saving Lives Today, Investing for Tomorrow (Geneva: IFRC, 2016) (https://reliefweb.int/
report/world/world-disasters-report-2016-resilience-saving-lives-today-investing-tomorrow-enar).
39	  L. Bosetti, A. Ivanovic and M. Munshey, A Review of Fragility, Risk and Resilience Frameworks (New York: United Nations 
University Centre for Policy Research, 2015), p. 16, cited in Sanderson and Sharma (eds), IFRC World Disasters Report.
40	  S. Woolf et al., ‘Towards Measurable Resilience: A Novel Framework Tool for the Assessment of Resilience Levels in 
Slums’, International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 19, 2016 (http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/1517964/1/1-s2.0-
S2212420916300504-main.pdf).


===== PAGE 79 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    069
Chapter 2
Figure 2.2 A model of resilience
Shocks
Stresses
System or 
process
1. Context
e.g. social 
group, region, 
institution
Resilience of what?
Resilience of what?
2. Disturbance
e.g. natural hazard, 
conflict, insecurity, 
food shortage, high 
fuel prices
3. Capacity to 
deal with 
disturbance
4. Reaction to 
disturbance
e.g. survice, cope, 
recover, learn, 
transform
Exposure
Bounce back 
better
Bounce back
Recover but 
worse than 
before
Collapse
Sensitivity
Adaptive 
capacity
Source: DFID, Defining Resilience: A DFID Approach Paper (London: DFID, 2011), reproduced in J. Twigg, Disaster Risk 
Reduction, Good Practice Review 9, Revised Edition (London: ODI, 2015), p. 19.
In this operational model (which aligns with Rockefeller’s definition above):
•	
Shocks and stresses are described as disturbances (a word commonly used in 
resilience thinking).
•	
In describing what actions to take (No. 3, capacity to deal with disturbance), the 
key words are exposure (the size of the shock or degree of stress), sensitivity (how 
much the individual, community or system is vulnerable) and the ability to adapt (the 
changes people or systems make as a result).
•	
Outcomes from the interventions taken range from very positive (‘bounce forward’) 
to failure (collapse).


===== PAGE 80 =====
070    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
This model is helpful in particular because of the three choices given in No. 3. Actions 
that work therefore include a combination of reducing exposure, reducing sensitivity and 
building adaptive capacity. 
2.3.3 Applying the concept of resilience in urban areas
Resilience has a wide array of applications in urban programming. At a high policy level, 
resilience is embedded in SDG 11, to ‘make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, 
Box 2.4  The Honiara Urban Resilience and Climate Action Plan 
(HURCAP), Solomon Islands   
The 2016 Honiara Urban Resilience and Climate Action Plan (HURCAP) is a collaboration 
between Honiara City Council, the Solomon Islands government and UN-Habitat. 
The aim of the HURCAP is to strengthen the capital’s resilience to the effects of 
climate change, earthquakes, tropical cyclones and tsunamis, as well as structural 
vulnerabilities including unplanned urban growth and poor urban planning.
Building resilience in this context has focused on promoting participatory and collaborative 
planning in ten priority areas: urban planning and land development; housing; 
infrastructure; water, sanitation and waste; ecosystem services and coastal processes; 
human health and well-being; communication (awareness and education); livelihoods and 
behaviour change; disaster preparedness and response; and governance and partnerships.
Box 2.5  Resilience: lessons from Amman and Kampala   
With the Rockefeller Foundation’s 100 Resilient Cities Programme, IRC is working 
to incorporate refugee movements into city development plans. In Amman and 
Kampala, it is working with the city authorities to support refugee-owned businesses, 
in particular women-owned businesses, in marginalised neighbourhoods. The 
initiative also included ensuring that international NGOs work more closely with local 
government and align their activities with local government policy. In Kampala, action 
points included a commitment not to view refugees as a burden, but ‘as an opportunity 
to identify and realise pathways to sustainable and inclusive growth’; and to engage 
both host and refugee populations collectively for mutual gain.
Source: P. Jones and D. Sanderson, ‘Urban Resilience and Informal and Squatter Settlements in the Pacific 
Region’, Development Bulletin 78, 2017.
Source: IRC, From Response to Resilience. Working with Cities and City Plans to Address Urban Displacement: Lessons 
from Amman and Kampala (London: IRC, 2018).


===== PAGE 81 =====
Chapter 2
Themes and issues     |    071
resilient and sustainable’. This is important because it signals that almost all the world’s 
governments have signed up to enact a resilience-based approach from now until 2030. 
According to the UN,41 as of 2015 142 countries had developed national policies, ‘the vast 
majority’ of which align with the SDGs. Resilience therefore can be openly discussed with 
national government decision-makers as a uniting course of action. The same applies where 
national policy translates to city-level policy (see the example below on municipal planning).
Resilience has also been especially tied in with climate change (recognised as both a shock 
and a stress: see Section 1.2.4 on climate change). The concept of resilience has also been 
used in the following ways.
•	
To provide convening power to unite disparate actors for collective action. The term 
itself is positive, and is readily understandable. As an example, the NGO CordAid 
uses ‘building urban resilience’ as a goal for convening neighbourhood groups to 
develop DRR programmes.42
41	  See https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2016/goal-11/.
42	  See, for example, http://www.worldurbancampaign.org/cordaid-urban-resilience-peoples-approach.
Useful sources of further information   
P. Sitko and A. Massella, Building Urban Resilience in the Face of Crisis: A Focus on People 
and Systems, GAUC, 2019 (https://drive.google.com/file/d/146jonovw5v0WItmyf8aEIhP9
7uSmxibJ/view).
100 Resilient Cities and the global resilience movement (https://
action.100resilientcities.org/page/s/join-the-global-resilience-movement#/-_/).
An extensive list of resources on resilience and climate change adaptation can be found 
at http://www.i-s-e-t.org/resources-cca-resilience.
The World Bank’s publication Building Urban Resilience, while focused on disaster risk 
reduction, includes guidelines on risk assessment and land upgrading, among other 
things (http://www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr/files/publication/EAP_handbook_principles_
tools_practice_web.pdf).
UN-Habitat’s 2017 publication Trends in Urban Resilience provides useful information 
on key actors and several case studies of urban resilience programming from a number 
of contexts (http://urbanresiliencehub.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Trends_in_
Urban_Resilience_2017.pdf).


===== PAGE 82 =====
072    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
To emphasise DRR efforts to reduce disaster risk before a shock or stress occurs. 
•	
To better combine development and humanitarian emergency actions and 
understandings – a theme running throughout this review is that effective urban 
humanitarian action requires longer, more developmental timeframes. 


===== PAGE 83 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    073
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches
3.1 Frameworks, standards and alliances
A number of frameworks, standards and alliances relate to humanitarian response in urban 
areas. The following seeks to highlight the urban-specific content of particular documents, 
while acknowledging that wider aspects of each document may also be applicable. Many of 
the following examples are of internationally agreed standards, often reflecting where the 
lenses of humanitarian practitioners are. These should be referred to alongside the national 
regulatory frameworks, standards and codes (for example building codes) that emergency 
response operations must adhere to.
3.1.1 Frameworks and global agreements
These include:
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)1 were agreed by world leaders in 2015 as part 
of the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. While all 17 are relevant to urban 
issues (for example ending poverty and hunger and gender equality), SDG11 – ‘Make cities 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable’ – is known as ‘the urban SDG’. Indicators for this 
goal include:2
•	
‘Access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services; upgrade 
slums.
•	
‘Access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, 
improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention 
to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with 
disabilities and older people.
•	
‘Inclusive and sustainable urbanisation and capacity for participatory, integrated 
and sustainable human settlement planning and management. 
•	
‘Protect and safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage.
1	
 See https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/
2	
 ‘SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities’ –  Indicators by Targets’ (https://medium.com/sdgs-resources/sdg-
11-indicators-5a613061b3dc).


===== PAGE 84 =====
074    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
‘Reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially 
decrease the direct economic losses caused by disasters, including water-related 
disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations.
•	
‘Reduce the adverse environmental impact of cities, including by paying special 
attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management.
•	
‘Universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible green and public spaces, in 
particular for women and children, older persons and people with disabilities.
•	
‘Positive economic, social and environmental links between urban, peri-urban and 
rural areas by strengthening national and regional development planning.
•	
‘Increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing 
integrated policies and plans for inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and 
adaptation to climate change and resilience to disasters, and develop and implement 
them, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 
(see below). 
•	
‘Support least developed countries, including through financial and technical 
assistance, in building sustainable and resilient buildings utilising local materials.’
The New Urban Agenda
The New Urban Agenda (NUA)3 was agreed at the Habitat III conference hosted by UN-Habitat 
in Quito, Ecuador, in 2016. The NUA ‘lays out standards and principles for the planning, 
construction, development, management, and improvement of urban areas along its five 
main pillars of implementation: national urban policies, urban legislation and regulations, 
urban planning and design, local economy and municipal finance, and local implementation’. 
Concerning humanitarian crises, the NUA refers to the need for better coordination and 
investments; the need to adopt and implement disaster risk reduction and management; 
the need to build urban resilience; better management of natural resources; and building 
the capacities of local authorities to develop and implement disaster risk reduction and 
response plans. 
The Grand Bargain
The Grand Bargain4 that resulted from the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit makes no 
specific reference to ‘urban’ or ‘cities’. Its commitments are nonetheless highly relevant to 
urban practice. They include: 
3	
 See http://habitat3.org/the-new-urban-agenda/.
4	
 See https://www.agendaforhumanity.org/initiatives/3861.


===== PAGE 85 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    075
Chapter 3
•	
more support and funding for local and national responders;
•	
increased use and coordination of cash-based programming (see Section 3.3);
•	
improved joint and impartial needs assessments (see Section 3.6);
•	
more emphasis on people receiving aid making decisions that affect their lives (a 
‘participation revolution’); and
•	
better engagement between humanitarian and development actors.  
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–20305 comprises seven targets 
and four priorities for reducing risk to disaster. In relation to urban issues in particular, the 
framework emphasises the need to consider land use, urban planning and building codes, 
and the promotion of disaster risk transfer and insurance mechanisms.
3.1.2 Standards 
These include:
The Sphere Project
Perhaps the best known set of standards is the Sphere Project’s Sphere Handbook: Humanitarian 
Charter and Minimum Standards in Humanitarian Response.6 While there is no dedicated urban 
chapter, the 2018 revision comprises guidance relating to urban areas within each section, 
including food, health, shelter and WASH (for sector-specific information see relevant sections 
of this review). For example, Sphere’s guidance on WASH states that ‘Community engagement 
can be harder in urban areas, where the population density is higher and at risk groups are 
less visible. However, in urban areas, public spaces, media and technology can provide the 
opportunity for broader and more efficient dialogue. Diverse ownership of assets (households 
in rural areas, public–private mix in urban areas) affects the choice of response options and 
methods of delivery’. The guidance suggests a mixed approach to WASH, including using 
markets, cash and vouchers, technical assistance and community engagement.  
Sphere’s 2016 guide Using the Sphere Standards in Urban Settings comprises urban case 
studies and ‘a checklist guiding practitioners in their choice of standards and adaptation of 
the supporting indicators and actions’.7 Issues covered by the guide include:
5	
 See https://www.unisdr.org/we/coordinate/sendai-framework.
6	
 Sphere Project, Sphere Handbook: Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Humanitarian Response, 
2018 (http://www.sphereproject.org/), p. 90.
7	
 Sphere Project, Using the Sphere Standards in Urban Settings, 2016 (https://www.spherestandards.org/
wp-content/uploads/using-the-sphere-standards-in-urban-settings.pdf).


===== PAGE 86 =====
076    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Community representation and leadership. 
•	
Recognising and minimising marginalisation. 
•	
Communication, outreach, feedback and accountability. 
•	
Protection concerns in urban situations. 
•	
Working in unplanned settlements with poor land use. 
•	
Minimising the negative effects of humanitarian assistance. 
•	
Awareness and prevention of gender-based violence. 
•	
Working in areas controlled by gangs or where rule of law is limited. 
•	
Working with a wider range of stakeholders. 
•	
Coordination of urban humanitarian responses. 
•	
Working in illegal and unrecognised settlements. 
The guide ends with a checklist for considering standards in urban contexts, covering 
applicability (for instance, are rurally derived standards applicable to urban contexts?), 
protection, communications (which standards need communicating?) and opportunities (for 
example using local markets).
The Core Humanitarian Standard on Quality and Accountability 
The Core Humanitarian Standard on Quality and Accountability (CHS)8 comprises nine 
commitments that aim to improve the quality and effectiveness of humanitarian prog-
rammes, in particular relating to improved accountability to communities. Although the CHS 
makes only one reference to ‘urban’, the commitments, concerning for example improved 
programme quality and participation, are relevant to programming in urban areas.
One report on accountability to urban communities in crises found that it had not been 
‘sufficiently embedded in the culture and practice of the humanitarian system to make 
a meaningful impact on the manner in which the humanitarian programme cycle is 
managed’.9 The paper presents ten reasons why this is so, among them weak governance, 
the humanitarian–development divide and a lack of incentives for affected people to 
meaningfully engage. 
The report is A. Brouder, Accountability to Affected Populations in Urban Crises: Who Cares?, 
Urban Crises Learning Partnership (UCLP), 2017 (http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/G04278.pdf).
8	
 See www.corehumanitarianstandard.org.
9	
 A. Brouder, Accountability to Affected Populations in Urban Crises: Who Cares? Urban Crises Learning Partnership 
(UCLP), 2017 (http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/G04278.pdf), p. 1. 


===== PAGE 87 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    077
Chapter 3
UNHCR’s 2009 policy on refugee protection and solutions in urban areas
UNHCR’s 2009 policy on refugee protection and solutions in urban areas ‘is based on the 
principle that the rights of refugees and UNHCR’s mandated responsibilities towards them 
are not affected by their location, the means whereby they arrived in an urban area or their 
status (or lack thereof) in national legislation. The Office considers urban areas to be a 
legitimate place for refugees to [exercise] their rights, including those stemming from their 
status as refugees as well as those that they hold in common with all other human beings’.10 
The policy outlines rights and responsibilities, and offers guidance on:
•	
Providing reception facilities.
•	
Registration and data collection.
•	
Ensuring that refugees are documented.
•	
Determining refugee status. 
•	
Reaching out to the community.
•	
Fostering constructive relations with urban refugees. 
•	
Maintaining security. 
•	
Promoting livelihoods and self-reliance. 
•	
Ensuring access to healthcare, education and other services. 
•	
Meeting material needs. 
•	
Promoting durable solutions.
UNHCR’s subsequent 2014 Policy on Alternatives to Camps ‘refocuses attention on 
refugees living in camps and extends the principal objectives of the urban refugee policy 
to all operational contexts’.11 The policy identifies several ‘lines of action’ for successful 
implementation, which includes ‘consulting with refugees and host communities’, 
‘achieving synergies with national development planning’ and ‘engaging with national 
authorities’. 
For further discussion of these policies see Section 1.3 on displacement.
10	  UNHCR Policy on Refugee Protection and Solutions in Urban Areas, September 2009 (http://www.unhcr.org/en-au/
protection/hcdialogue%20/4ab356ab6/unhcr-policy-refugee-protection-solutions-urban-areas.html), p. 3.
11	  UNHCR, Policy on Alternatives to Camps, 2014 (http://www.unhcr.org/5422b8f09.html), p. 6.


===== PAGE 88 =====
078    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
3.1.3 Alliances and networks
These include:
The Global Alliance for Urban Crises (GAUC) 
The GAUC12 ‘promotes a vision of inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable cities and 
towns in which urban communities, their leaders and members have the power, capacities 
and resources to address the risks and reality of humanitarian crises, to mitigate crisis 
impacts on the most vulnerable, including the displaced, and to enable affected people 
to determine, with dignity, the course of their lives and their futures’. Its aim is ‘to develop 
and connect global, regional and national rosters of urban and local government experts 
specializing in humanitarian crisis response and resilience building’. GAUC’s members are 
drawn from academia, aid agencies, municipalities and business.
GAUC’s Urban Crises Charter is intended to be used as ‘a basis for both policy and operational 
level engagement, in order to be more effective in preventing, preparing for, and responding 
to humanitarian crises in urban environments’. The charter comprises the following 
commitments:
•	
Prioritise local municipal leadership in determining responses to urban crises that 
are aligned with development trajectories and promote the active participation of 
affected people.
•	
Adopt urban resilience as a common framework to align human rights, humanitarian 
and development goals.
•	
Manage urban displacement as a combined human rights, development and 
humanitarian concern.
•	
Build partnerships between city, national, regional and global levels, across discipl-
ines and professions. 
As an example of the first commitment, ‘prioritising local leadership’, IRC’s work in Amman 
(see Section 2.3) has focused on engaging with the local municipality to ensure long-term 
strategic planning for integrating Syrian refugees into city life. Greater Amman Municipality’s 
Resilience Strategy contains a commitment to: 10% refugee ownership of business start-
ups (in particular those run by women); enhancing social cohesion; supporting refugee 
businesses start-ups in non-refugee areas; and strengthening the engagement of women 
and girls in municipal youth centres.
12	  http://urbancrises.org/.


===== PAGE 89 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    079
Chapter 3
Uniting Cities and Local Governments (UCLG)
UCLG13 is a network of local governments. Its aim is ‘To be the united voice and world advocate 
of democratic local self-government, promoting its values, objectives and interests, through 
cooperation between local governments, and within the wider international community’. 
UCLG’s Taskforce for Territorial prevention and management of crisis, formed in 2008, 
focuses primarily on preparedness. Its 2016 report Urban Consultations: Perspectives from 
Cities in Crisis14 identified three key challenges in urban humanitarian response:
•	
Lack of pre-crisis preparedness.
•	
Divergence in the responses of local and international actors, ‘fuelled by lack of 
coordination mechanisms between them’.
•	
The consequences of diverging trends between international and local actors, i.e. 
‘the loss in effectiveness, efficiency and relevance of the humanitarian response 
because of the failure to promote synergies between international and local actors’.
The Cities Alliance
The Cities Alliance,15 a partnership between the World Bank and UN-Habitat, ‘promotes 
long-term programmatic approaches that are focused on strengthening local skills and 
capacity, developing national urban policies, investing in infrastructure, enabling strategic 
city planning, and engaging citizens’. Among other things, the website provides guidance 
and advice to local municipalities concerning improved city management. 
3.2 Area-based approaches
Area-based approaches (ABAs) have become popular in recent years as an urban-
derived approach to post-crisis recovery. They are first and foremost about supporting 
neighbourhoods to recover. In practice, they resemble more a developmental approach than 
perhaps a traditional humanitarian one. 
There are a number of different definitions for ABAs,16 as well as a number of different 
names, including settlements approach, place-based approach and neighbourhoods 
13	  See https://www.uclg.org/
14	  UCLG, Consultations on Humanitarian Responses in Urban Areas: Perspectives from Cities in Crisis, 2016 
(https://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/cities_in_crisis.pdf).
15	  See http://www.citiesalliance.org/.
16	  See for instance E. Parker and V. Maynard, Humanitarian Response to Urban Crises: A Review of Area-based 
Approaches, IIED Working Paper (London: IIED, 2015) (http://pubs.iied.org/10742IIED).


===== PAGE 90 =====
080    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
approach.17 All, however, encapsulate the importance of being based in a defined location 
(such as a neighbourhood). The aim is to strengthen local ownership and the engage-
ment of affected populations by working in a participatory way and taking a multi-sectoral 
approach.
This section provides a definition for ABAs and outlines ten principles for implementing 
ABAs according to the broad steps of the project management cycle (assessment and design, 
implementation and evaluation and learning). Given the cross-cutting and multi-sectoral 
nature of ABAs, this section relates closely to a large number of others in this review, including 
assessments and targeting (Section 3.6), design and management (3.9) and monitoring and 
evaluation (Section 3.10). 
This section draws on research into ABAs as part of the Stronger Cities Initiative.18 The full 
report, which contains further information and guidance, is D. Sanderson and P. Sitko, Urban 
Area-based Approaches in Post-disaster Contexts (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/
pdfs/10825IIED.pdf).
3.2.1 Defining ABAs
One definition is that an ABA ‘supports people after a disaster in a specific location to 
transition effectively from relief to recovery; it works with existing structures and can be 
scaled up’. The Global Shelter Cluster Working Group identifies the following commonalities 
across 30 case studies:
•	
Understanding the community – context is key. 
•	
Engagement with multiple actors. 
•	
Supporting alignment of humanitarian and development priorities. 
•	
Capacity strengthening of local actors. 
•	
Strong engagement with local authorities. 
•	
Significant resource requirements and time investment.
•	
Scaling up beyond a specific context is challenging.
17	  For further discussion, see Global Shelter Cluster, Settlements Approaches in Urban Areas Working Group, 2018 
(https://www.sheltercluster.org/settlements-approaches-urban-areas-wg/documents/settlements-terminology-paper-
draftapr2018).
18	  The Stronger Cities Initiative was a consortium initiative comprising the International Rescue Committee (IRC), the 
Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), World Vision International (WVI) and the University of New South Wales (UNSW). 
The purpose of the Initiative was to produce practical, field-tested guidance for humanitarian organisations working in 
urban conflict, displacement and natural hazard settings. 


===== PAGE 91 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    081
Chapter 3
•	
Established humanitarian coordination mechanisms remain structured around a 
sectoral or cluster approach.
•	
The Housing, Land and Property context is complex. 
•	
The relationship with and impact on nearby settlements can be difficult: ‘Challenges 
and tensions can arise when balancing the needs and priorities of affected 
populations within the specific settlement in relation to neighboring settlements 
and overall city level planning’.19
The Global Shelter Cluster’s Settlement Approaches in Urban Areas: Compendium of Case 
Studies (Geneva: IFRC and UNHCR, 2018) can be found at https://www.sheltercluster.org/
sites/default/files/docs/urbansettlementcompendium_uswg_july2018.pdf.
As noted in the introduction, ABAs are one form of a wider approach to post-disaster 
recovery programmes that embodies neighbourhood-based, place-based and settlements-
based approaches. For a discussion, see C. Setchell, ‘The Emerging Importance of the 
Settlements Approach’, in Global Shelter Cluster, State of the Humanitarian Shelter and 
Settlements Report. For a summary of the developmental roots of ABAs, see D. Sanderson, 
‘Implementing Area-based Approaches (ABAs) in Urban Post-disaster Contexts’, 
Environment and Urbanization 29(2), October 2017 (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
abs/10.1177/0956247817717422).
ABAs are complex to manage, and involve negotiation and dialogue with local residents, 
government figures and other stakeholders (see the example from Haiti in Box 3.1). 
The effective coordination of sectoral inputs, such as WASH, shelter, protection and 
livelihoods, also takes a lot of effort. This complexity mirrors the reality of city recovery, 
and the evidence indicates that this is what is required if investments in recovery programmes 
are to have positive and lasting results.
3.2.2 Implementing ABAs in the project management cycle
Figure 3.1 presents ten principles for implementing ABAs according to the project 
management cycle (assessment and design, implementation and evaluation and learning).
19	  Global Shelter Cluster, Settlement Approaches in Urban Areas: Compendium of Case Studies (Geneva: IFRC and 
UNHCR, 2018) (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/urbansettlementcompendium_uswg_july2018.pdf).


===== PAGE 92 =====
082    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Box 3.1  Implementing an ABA: Delmas 19, Port-au-Prince, Haiti   
The Haiti Urban Regeneration and Reconstruction Programme (URRP) was instigated by 
the British Red Cross (BRC) in Port-au-Prince following the Haiti earthquake as an urban 
ABA programme. Activities covered a range of coordinated interventions, including cash 
(small business loans and microfinance), reconstruction of infrastructure and housing 
repairs. The final evaluation report documents some of the programming challenges in 
involved in working in ‘the densely populated Delmas 19, which was characterised by 
endemic urban violence and a lack of community cohesion, and [the neighbourhood] 
was also extremely vulnerable as a result of underlying poverty as well as the effects 
of the earthquake … the social, political and economic networks of any densely 
populated, urban environment are incredibly complex and ceaselessly changing. 
‘At the time, BRC took the risky decision to locate its entire Community Mobilisation 
Team in the heart of the community, investing heavily to develop a “Community 
Mobilisation Team” in an effort to foster greater links, transparency and accountability 
with the community it was seeking to support. While the relationships and tensions 
between BRC and the community ebbed and flowed, it is important to highlight that 
BRC was able to work with the entire community to plan and design the URRP’.20  
The evaluation also discusses challenges relating to timeframes. ‘BRC intentionally 
pursued a participatory approach in the design and delivery of the URRP, which 
increased levels of engagement and transparency. However, it also led directly to 
delays in programme delivery, as it took time to consult and engage with the multitude 
of participants with vested interests, from single individuals to local unelected 
committees up to Mayoral elected authorities. The Community Mobilisation Team 
was central to the URRP delivery, convening the community and programme team, 
communicating information and mitigating challenges from pre-design to post-exit 
phases … reaching consensus amongst stakeholders in an urban environment, let alone 
a dense urban slum such as Delmas 19, is incredibly difficult … due to the scale of the 
beneficiary assessment process, which ensured accurate and triangulated vulnerability 
data, but also involved negotiating with a large community of residents to determine 
the most appropriate programme option’.21 
Source: Advisem Services, British Red Cross’ Haiti Urban Regeneration and Reconstruction Programme (URRP). Final 
Evaluation (Ottowa: Advisem Services, 2016) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/british-red-cross-haiti-urban-
regeneration-and-reconstruction-programme-urrp).
20    Advisem Services, British Red Cross’ Haiti Urban Regeneration and Reconstruction Programme (URRP). Final 
Evaluation (Ottowa: Advisem Services, 2016) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/british-red-cross-haiti-urban-
regeneration-and-reconstruction-programme-urrp).
21   Ibid.


===== PAGE 93 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    083
Chapter 3
The ten principles are as follows:
1. Multi-agency, multi-sector participatory assessments
Assessments above all need to be participatory, with mutual learning between agencies, 
local government and neighbourhood members reinforced wherever possible. Assessment 
approaches are discussed at length in the following sections: Section 3.5 (context analysis); 
Section 3.6 (assessments and profiling); Section 3.7 (targeting) and Section 3.8 (response 
analysis).
Figure 3.1 Ten principles for implementing ABAs in the project 
management cycle
Source: Sanderson and Sitko, Urban Area-based Approaches in Post-disaster Contexts.
Evaluation and learning
9	 Plan for scaling-up and
10	 Measure contribution not 
attribution
Assessment and design
1	 Multi-agency, multi-sector 
participatory assessments
2	 Focus on location
3	 Realistic timeframes
Implementation
4	 People-centred actions – whose 
reality counts?
5	 Work with existing structures
6	 Collaborating sectors and 
programmes
7	 Flexible programming: adaptive 
management
8	 Nimble internal systems


===== PAGE 94 =====
084    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
2. Focus on location
The intent behind focusing on location is to reinforce the importance of people’s identity 
(in belonging to a specific part of the city), and of rebuilding people’s everyday lives. 
Focusing on location also forces implementing agencies to take account of the complex, 
interconnected nature of real life. For example, looking at what people live in (shelter; 
see Section 4.2) also ties into safety (protection; see Section 4.7), access to services 
(WASH; see Section 4.4), the work people might do in or immediately outside their homes 
(livelihoods; see Section 4.5), and so on. Focusing on place has been a long-established 
approach in recovery. For example, after Typhoon Haiyan IFRC found that one benefit of 
focusing on location is that it ‘involves the consideration20 of other aspects of community 
life beyond shelter and how these aspects all fit together physically and functionally’.21 
Location, often referred to as ‘the neighbourhood approach’,  is discussed in Section 4.2 
on shelter and settlements. 
3. Realistic timeframes
Perhaps one of the most significant challenges of ABAs is that they may take longer than 
traditional recovery efforts by external agencies. When this is the case, ensuring local 
ownership of activities is vital so that (as well as for other reasons) programmes do not stall 
when agencies withdraw. 
It is worth noting here that, beyond immediate life-saving actions following a disaster, 
such as search and rescue, emergency medicine and meeting basic needs (food, water and 
shelter), the belief that aid needs to be hurried is largely a myth. A study of the experi-
ences of some 6,000 people in humanitarian relief and recovery operations in a number 
of disasters found that what people needed was less speed, and more consideration. 
The study found that ‘many feel that “too much” is given “too fast”’. The study also 
found that ‘very few people call for more aid: virtually everyone says they want “smarter 
aid”’.22 It takes time to ensure the right programmes are designed, conceived and 
implemented in collaboration with local power structures. 
21	  V. Stodart, ‘Regulatory Barriers and the Provision of Shelter in Post-disaster Situations: Housing, Land and 
Property (HLP) Issues in the Recovery of Tacloban after 2013 Typhoon Haiyan’, in D. Sanderson, J. Kayden and J. Leis, 
Urban Disaster Resilience: New Dimensions from International Practice in the Built Environment (Routledge, New York, 
2016), p. 108.
22	  M. Anderson, D. Brown and J. Isabella, Time to Listen: Hearing People on the Receiving End of International Aid 
(Cambridge, MA: CDA Collaborative Learning Projects, 2012) (http://cdacollaborative.org/wordpress/wp-content/
uploads/2016/01/Time-to-Listen-Hearing-People-on-the-Receiving-End-of-International-Aid.pdf), p. 2.


===== PAGE 95 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    085
Chapter 3
4. People-centred actions – whose reality counts?23
Adherence to what are commonly known as people-centred approaches or actions (as 
introduced in Section 1.1, ways of seeing the city) involves:
•	
supporting affected populations in their own recovery; 
•	
adopting a consultative, facilitative approach;
•	
taking the time to listen (through participatory assessments); and
•	
using tools such as those common in action planning (see principle seven below).
The importance of such an approach is identified in the 2014 Core Humanitarian 
Standard, namely Standard Four, that response is based on participation (see Section 
3.1 on frameworks, standards and alliances). Further tools on participatory assessment 
(such as participatory rapid appraisal) are described in Section 3.6. See also D. Archer 
and S. Boonyabancha, ‘Seeing a Disaster as an Opportunity – Harnessing the Energy of 
Disaster Survivors for Change’, Environment and Urbanization 23(2) (London: IIED, 2011) 
(http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0956247811410011).
5. Work with existing structures
A key point about cities is that structures for almost everything already exist: the job of 
humanitarian assistance and recovery is to engage with them. Structures here are taken 
to mean services provided by government, utilities such as water supply, electricity and 
sewage and community-organised structures such as water committees. For interventions 
to be effective after the life of a programme, activities must engage with existing structures, 
even if these are weak – otherwise, such structures may be weakened even further.24 
Working with existing structures is explored further in Section 2.1 on coordination. 
6. Collaboration between sectors and programmes
Collaboration between sectors is essential in order to deliver a more coherent and unified 
response. As the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) notes: 
‘no single humanitarian agency can cover all humanitarian needs; collaboration is not an 
23	  ‘Whose reality counts?’ is a question for successful neighbourhood interventions coined by participation expert 
Robert Chambers. The question relates to interventions undertaken by external agencies on behalf of local 
populations, and is intended to challenge their assumptions and approaches. Asking ‘whose reality counts?’ compels 
intervening agencies to consider the aims, desires and aspirations of affected people first (and to question their own 
assumptions), and from that, to implement programmes that are relevant first and foremost to the people they are 
intended to help.
24	  P. Knox Clarke and L. Campbell, Exploring Coordination in Humanitarian Clusters, ALNAP Study (London: ALNAP/
ODI, 2016) (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/update-exploring-coordination-in-
humanitarian-clusters.pdf).


===== PAGE 96 =====
086    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
option, it is a25 necessity’.26 In urban areas, with overlapping and complex needs, collaboration 
is especially important. Collaboration is discussed in Section 2.1 on coordination. See also 
T. Alcanya and F. Al-Murani, Urban Humanitarian Response: Why Local and International 
Collaboration Matters, Briefing, (London: IIED, 2016) (file:///Users/david/Desktop/HIF%20
proposals%20March%202017/17378IIED.pdf).
25   Source: Global Shelter Cluster, Settlement Approaches in Urban Areas: Compendium of Case Studies (Geneva: IFRC 
and UNHCR, 2018) (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/urbansettlementcompendium_uswg_
july2018.pdf).
	
26	  OCHA, ‘The Four Pillars of Humanitarian Reform’, 2005 (www.humanitarianreform.org).
Box 3.2  Settlement-based response and recovery in Bangui    
Following the easing of conflict in the Central African Republic in 2016–17, a pilot 
project, AGORA, assisted the return of some 20,000 people to the capital city, Bangui. 
The initiative piloted a settlements-based approach in four neighbourhoods, following 
extensive consultation and agreement between local neighbourhood groups, mayors, 
civil society representatives, informal community leaders, UN agencies and NGOs. The 
project’s five steps comprised:
1.	 Setting up an institutional framework and Urban Working Group. 
2.	 Multi-sectoral settlement-based assessments, involving collecting primary data and 
consultations with local actors.
3.	 Settlement-based response planning ‘reflecting priorities jointly agreed by local 
and international actors and response actions in the short, mid and long term’. 
Progress was posted on a shared website.
4.	 Coordination and implementation of response plans, chaired jointly by the mayor 
and OCHA.
5.	 	Capacity-building of local authorities.
Challenges included coordination (‘A lot of time was required to clarify the link between 
existing Clusters and inter-cluster systems and the Urban working group, causing delay 
in project implementation’ 26); limited local capacities and resources; and limited 
resources, preventing project replication in other neighbourhoods. 
Source: Global Shelter Cluster, Settlement Approaches in Urban Areas: Compendium of Case Studies (Geneva: IFRC 
and UNHCR, 2018) (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/urbansettlementcompendium_uswg_
july2018.pdf).


===== PAGE 97 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    087
Chapter 3
7. Flexible programming and adaptive management
A long-recognised hindrance to effective programming in aid responses relates to tools, 
funding flows and administrative requirements that are insufficiently flexible.27 The recent 
development and piloting of new tools, such as adaptive management, may be suited 
to grappling with the uncertainties and complexities of urban programming. Adaptive 
management, along with other approaches, is discussed further in Section 3.9 on design and 
management.
8. Nimble internal systems
For an urban ABA to have the best chance of success, agencies’ internal systems, such as 
human resources and finance, need to be aligned to the purpose and overall goal of the 
programme. Involving HR and finance staff at the earliest stages of the design of an ABA 
can help support services function more smoothly in the subsequent implementation of a 
programme, with agreed clarity (between programme and non-programme staff) on the 
overall aim. 
9. Plan for scaling-up
Successful ABAs need to consider scale-up – one-off, isolated projects do little to assist with 
the wider requirements a city may need for recovery. Activities for ensuring scale-up include:
•	
Ensure local ownership as far as possible (see Principle 4).
•	
Work within local structures and municipal planning processes (see Principle 5).
•	
Coordinate with other organisations to ensure a more even spread of effort. 
•	
Ensure the area-based project does not work against wider municipal urban planning 
and development by coordinating with the local government (see Section 2.1 on 
coordination).
Given the projectised approach of most humanitarian aid responses, there are challenges to 
scaling up. They include:28 
•	
Insufficient analysis of social, cultural and economic conditions and relationships, 
leading to projects with a narrow focus that are hard to replicate.
•	
Project duration, which may be short and not aligned to the timetables of other 
organisations.
27	  L. Wild, D. Booth and C. Valters, Putting Theory into Practice: How DFID Is Doing Development Differently (London: 
ODI, 2017) (www.odi.org/publications/10729-putting-theory-practice-how-dfid-doing-developmentdifferently).
28	  UNDP, Guidance Note: Scaling Up for Development Programmes, January 2013 (https://www.undp.org/content/
undp/en/home/librarypage/poverty-reduction/participatory_localdevelopment/guidance-note--scaling-up-
development-programmes.html).


===== PAGE 98 =====
088    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Short-term and/or unpredictable funding. 
•	
Lack of local ownership. 
Further guidance on scaling up can be found in WHO, Nine Steps for a Scaling Up Strategy 
(Geneva: WHO, 2010) (http://www.expandnet.net/PDFs/ExpandNetWHO%20Nine%20Step%20
Guide%20published.pdf) and UNDP, Guidance Note: Scaling Up for Development Programmes, 
January 2013 (https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/poverty-reduction/
participatory_localdevelopment/guidance-note--scaling-up-development-programmes.html). 
10. Measure contribution not attribution
Evaluations of agency activities almost always seek to measure attribution, i.e.  correlating 
the activities of one project to community benefits. ABAs however are intended to be cross-
sectoral, holistic and oriented towards engaging in processes and people. To these ends, there 
is an opportunity to measure an initiative’s contribution to wider outcomes, not only those 
constrained by a particular project. This suits ABAs, since ‘the activities of an individual agency, 
and the effects of those activities, will not normally occur in isolation but rather as part of a 
multi-layered, complex response by both local and external actors’.29 Two approaches to this 
are measuring ‘contribution to change’ and neighbourhood-level changes in assets. Both these 
approaches are discussed further in Section 3.10 on monitoring, evaluation and learning.
3.3 Cash and markets 
The use of cash transfers and vouchers in humanitarian action has grown substantially in 
recent years. In 2016, cash transfers and vouchers were worth approximately $2.8 billion, a 
40% increase from 2015.30 Cash transfers and vouchers are particularly appropriate in cities; 
indeed, the Cash Learning Partnership31 argues that cash transfers should be the primary 
response in urban areas. Cash transfers and vouchers require functioning markets to be 
in place – which cities have in abundance – and working with markets compels external 
agencies to operate with and within existing structures. 
All the indications are that cash transfers and vouchers will continue to gain momentum. 
29	  R. Few et al., Contribution to Change: An Approach to Evaluating the Role of Intervention in Disaster Recovery 
(Rugby: IT Publications, 2014) (http://www.opml.co.uk/sites/default/files/bk-contribution-change-intervention-
disaster-recovery-221113-en_0.pdf), p. 8.
30	  Development Initiatives, Global Humanitarian Assistance Report 2018 (Bristol: Development Initiatives, 2018) 
(http://devinit.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/GHA-Report-2018.pdf), p. 11.
31	  T. Cross and A. Johnston, Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Emergencies: A Toolkit for Practitioners, CaLP, 2011 
(http://www.urban-response.org/resource/7056).


===== PAGE 99 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    089
Chapter 3
This section32 identifies current forms of cash transfers and vouchers. It discusses decision-
making on using cash transfers. The section reviews using cash in urban refugee settings. It 
ends with a discussion of markets and some current market analysis approaches.
3.3.1 Types of cash transfers and vouchers
Cash transfers and vouchers can be used for a variety of humanitarian and recovery 
objectives. These interventions support households by providing them with resources to 
meet their needs, and have the secondary benefit of supporting local markets. They enable 
greater choice and flexibility for households compared to the distribution of in-kind goods. 
Cash transfers 
Cash transfers refer to the provision of money to individuals or households. Money is usually 
distributed using existing financial infrastructure, such as banks, money transfer companies 
and payment companies. In some cases transfers can be provided digitally (also referred 
to as ‘electronic transfers’, ‘e-transfers’ and ‘digital transfers’) via mobile devices and cards 
(such as prepaid, ATM, credit or debit cards). E-transfers work particularly well in urban areas, 
where there is often good financial infrastructure and relatively high literacy rates.33 Where 
financial services are weak or absent, cash can be distributed in envelopes, though this can 
pose risks for people receiving the cash and the entities transporting and distributing it.
Cash transfers emerged as an alternative to in-kind assistance because it does not make 
sense to distribute commodities that are available in local markets. They can also increase 
access to existing services. Humanitarian aid agencies can provide cash transfers for specific 
purposes – such as improving food security or access to shelter – or define objectives more 
broadly around supporting households to meet their basic needs. These types of transfers 
are sometimes referred to as ‘multipurpose cash grants’, as the intention is for households to 
use the transfer for multiple purposes that they choose, rather than specific ones determined 
by humanitarian agencies. However, money is inherently flexible, so households may use the 
marginal income from a cash transfer as they choose regardless of a programme’s objective.
Multipurpose cash may also provide a more integrated, multisectoral response. This is 
important in programming in complex urban areas (see for example Section 3.2 on ABAs). 
Further information on multipurpose cash grants can be found at  http://www.cashlearning.
org/thematic-area/multipurpose-cash-assistance.
32	  This section benefited greatly from the inputs of Sarah Bailey.
33	  G. Smith and L. Mohiddin, A Review of Evidence of Humanitarian Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Areas, IIED 
Working Paper (London: IIED, 2015).


===== PAGE 100 =====
090    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Vouchers
Vouchers are a token, digital credit or coupon exchanged for pre-identified goods at designated 
locations. Vouchers are appropriate when cash transfers are not feasible (for example because 
of government objections), to ensure the quality of goods (such as vouchers for shelter 
materials) or to link recipients to specific services, for example latrine desludging. In some 
cases aid agencies (and/or their donors) are more comfortable with vouchers as they can 
influence spending towards specific goods and services in line with their missions. However, 
vouchers limit recipients’ choices and require administrative work to identify, monitor and 
pay vendors, and some evaluations have found that the prices of goods are higher in voucher 
shops than in local markets.34 It is therefore important that vouchers are selected because 
they are the most appropriate way to meet people’s needs in a particular context, and not 
simply to control people’s spending in line with a humanitarian agency’s objectives. 
Cash for work
Cash for work (CFW) entails paying recipients for undertaking a labour-based activity. CFW 
programmes can be considered when the aid agency has the necessary equipment and 
technical skills to supervise the work and adhere to legal regulations, public or community 
works are needed, the target population has the capacity to undertake the work and 
meaningful assets can be created and maintained.35 One criticism of such schemes is that 
they sometimes lead to poor-quality or unnecessary work.36    
Recent research by ALNAP37 on the use of CFW in earthquake response suggests that it can 
be appropriate, providing income to households and creating useful work, including drain 
and canal clearance and rubble removal. The report cites an example from Nepal following 
the earthquakes there, where a UNDP CFW programme was used to ‘remove debris from 
public buildings, demolish private houses, and help rehabilitate local government offices’.38
The study also notes concerns in implementing CFW programmes. Citing CFW after the Haiti 
earthquake, it notes problems including ‘a lack of preparation and capacity to implement on a 
large scale, a slow governmental approval process, and difficulties in identifying both the 
34	  See for example J. Drummond et al., WFP’s Regional Response to the Syria Crisis, 2011–2014 (Rome: WFP, 2015); S. 
Bailey, An Independent Evaluation of Concern Worldwide’s Emergency Response in North Kivu, DRC (London: ODI, 2009).
35	  See International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, Cash in Emergencies Toolkit, 2016 (http://rcmcash.org/).
36	  See for example C. Clermont et al., Urban Disasters: Lessons from Haiti. Study of Member Agencies’ Responses to 
the Earthquake in Port au Prince, Haiti, January 2010 (London: DEC, 2011).
37	  H. Juillard and J. Jourdain, ALNAP Lessons Paper: Responding to Earthquakes (London: ODI, 2019).
38	  A. Bhattacharjee, After-action review of Nepal earthquake response, UNDP Crisis Response Unit, 2016, p.15, cited 
in H. Juillard and J. Jourdain, ALNAP Lessons Paper: Responding to Earthquakes (London: ODI, 2019).


===== PAGE 101 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    091
Chapter 3
activities to conduct and the affected populations to participate’.39 Other reports note 
opportunities for corruption (‘zombie crews’, where payments are made to non-existent 
workers) and examples of meaningless work.40 Careful consideration should also be given 
to the purpose of a CFW scheme. If it is to provide cash to households, then cash transfers 
should be preferred – don’t think that people need to ‘earn’ the money by undertaking work 
for the sake of it.41
Safety nets 
Safety net programmes identify vulnerable people with ongoing and regular support, usually 
to meet basic needs. Such approaches have been widely used in food-scarce locations 
and in situations of chronic poverty.42 In Ethiopia, for example, the Productive Safety Net 
Programme (PSNP) provides transfers of food, cash or a combination to chronically food-
insecure households. Around 8 million people participate in the scheme. In Kenya, four major 
unconditional cash transfer programmes operate under the National Safety Net Programme 
(NSNP), providing monthly payments of between KES 2,000 and KES 2,700 (around $20–$30). 
Conditionality
Any form of transfer (cash, voucher or in-kind) can be provided with conditions (conditional) 
or without (unconditional). Unconditional means that no action is required to receive the 
transfer. Conditional transfers require that households do something in order to receive 
the transfer (e.g. sending children to school). In some instances conditions are put in place 
for receiving instalments of large grants related to livelihoods recovery or shelter, such as 
rebuilding part of a shelter. Conditions are usually imposed to encourage behaviour change, 
which may not be appropriate during an emergency. Conditions are more common in social 
protection programmes than in humanitarian ones, such as large-scale conditional cash 
transfers in Latin America. Because CFW requires work to be completed, it is sometimes 
described in humanitarian operations as a conditional transfer.
3.3.2 Deciding when to use cash transfers 
Decision-making on cash transfers in urban areas follows the same general criteria as any 
other response. The main questions are whether people can buy what they need safely at 
39	  Juillard and Jourdain, ALNAP Lessons Paper, p.18.
40	  D. Sanderson and P. Knox-Clarke, Responding to Urban Disasters: Learning from Previous Relief and Recovery 
Operations (London: ODI, 2012) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/responding-to-urban-disasters-learning-from-
previous-relief-and-recovery-operations).
41	  F. Grünewald et al., Realtime Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Supported by DG ECHO in Haiti, Groupe URD, 2012, p. 6.
42	  See for example https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/safetynets.


===== PAGE 102 =====
092    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Source: T. Cross and A. Johnston, Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Emergencies: A Toolkit for Practitioners, CaLP, 
2011 (http://www.urban-response.org/resource/7056), p. xviii.
Is the urban economy 
cash based?
Do the most vulnerable 
groups have access to 
markets?
Are urban financial 
institutions 
functioning?
Are basic goods 
available for the most 
vulnerable groups in 
the urban markets that 
they usually access
Are mobile phone, 
ATMs, internet, and 
point-of-sale networks 
functioning?
Are there security risks, 
such as riots or robbery, 
related to in-kind 
distributions or large 
gatherings of people in 
urban settings?
If yes to the preconditions, an urban cash transfer response is appropriate. Consideration of 
advantages of using different types of cash programming (grants, cash-for-work, or vouchers) 
and transfer mechanisms is required.
Consider in-kind 
assistance
Consider in-kind or 
organised fairs
Consider in-kind, supply 
side, or vouchers
Consider in-kind 
distribution or 
recapitalisation 
of micro-finance 
institutions
Preconditions
Urban advantages
Yes?
Yes?
Yes?
Yes?
Yes?
Yes?
No?
No?
No?
No?
Figure 3.2 Decision-making tree


===== PAGE 103 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    093
Chapter 3
reasonable prices, and whether money can be delivered efficiently, safely and accountably 
compared to other possible forms of assistance.43 The decision-making tree in Figure 3.2 
highlights the kinds of responses that can be used based on the circumstances. 
Reasons for using cash transfers in urban areas include: 
•	
The cash-based nature of urban living, for example to buy food and pay rent.
•	
Providing cash supports local markets.
•	
Urban areas have the financial infrastructure and institutions for distributing transfers. 
•	
In-kind distributions are likely to be more costly and difficult and may be in- or less 
appropriate.
The potential risks and challenges of using cash transfers and vouchers in urban areas are 
similar to those elsewhere:
•	
Protection issues, such as security risks, and cultural barriers that prevent women 
from receiving transfers. Some groups, such as elderly or illiterate people, may find it 
difficult to access or spend transfers.
•	
Although generally better than in rural areas, e-transfer infrastructure in urban areas 
may still be limited – see the example from Niamey in Box 3.3.
•	
Lack of familiarity with the technology used to deliver transfers, such as mobile 
phones and ATM cards.
43	  High Level Panel on Humanitarian Cash Transfers, Doing Cash Differently: How Cash Transfers Can Transform 
Humanitarian Aid (London: ODI, 2015). 
Box 3.3  Challenges in mobile money transfers in Niamey   
One study of a cash transfer programme operated by Save the Children for refugees in 
the Nigerien capital Niamey found that ‘mobile phone delivery mechanisms could be 
more cost-efficient than the MFI mechanisms’.  There were however significant set-up 
costs. According to the study, this was due to the need for training, given low levels of 
familiarity with mobile phone technology. ‘The study estimated that it would take 10 
months to offset these costs.’
Source: P. Creti, Mobile Cash Transfers for Urban Refugees in Niamey, Niger, SCUK, cited in G. Smith and L. Mohiddin, 
A Review of Evidence of Humanitarian Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Areas, IIED Working Paper (London: IIED, 
2015), p. 33.


===== PAGE 104 =====
094    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
A ‘toolkit for practitioners’44 identified the following recommendations for cash transfers 
in cities:
•	
Building trust with other urban stakeholders through partnerships and collaboration 
is key, especially in relation to government, which can act as both facilitator and 
gatekeeper of cash transfers.45  
•	
Effective private sector relationships are essential. Activities include the use of 
technology (such as mobile cash transfers) for effective and timely coverage. 
•	
Design cash transfers to be flexible and aimed at a number of outcomes.
•	
Design cash transfers according to the regulatory environment.
•	
Advocacy is an essential programming tool. Advocacy around the use and benefits 
of cash transfers, for instance to host governments, can lead to more effective 
programmes and wider coverage. 
•	
Combine cash transfers with other forms of support to meet basic needs, promote 
livelihoods and increase access to basic services (often referred to as cash plus).
Cash programmes in displacement contexts should always consider in their design host 
populations, who may be at the same level of poverty as (or poorer than) displaced people 
(see the example in Box 3.5 from Jordan). The aim should be to reduce tensions between 
host and displaced groups. The provision of cash transfers and vouchers in humanitarian 
responses and in social protection programmes has created opportunities for stronger 
links between the two; in the Philippines and Nepal, for instance, aid agencies have ‘topped 
up’ existing social assistance transfers to people affected by disaster, and in Mali design 
44	  T. Cross and A. Johnston, Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Emergencies: A Toolkit for Practitioners, CaLP, 2011 
(http://www.urban-response.org/resource/7056).
45	  For further elaboration, see ibid., p. 44.
Box 3.4  The Common Cash Facility (CCF) in Jordan    
The Common Cash Facility (CCF), a partnership between UNHCR, the Cairo Amman 
Bank and IrisGuard, a biometrics company, provides cash assistance to refugees in 
Jordan. The Facility allows refugees to withdraw cash from an ATM equipped with iris 
scanning technology. Refugees are informed by SMS that cash is ready for withdrawal. 
Operated by UN agencies and NGOs, the CCF is used by over 90% of refugees in Jordan 
living outside camps.
Source: UNHCR, The Common Cash Facility (CCF) (Geneva: UNHCR, 2017) (https://www.unhcr.org/596331dd7.pdf).


===== PAGE 105 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    095
Chapter 3
features have been46 tweaked to align with social protection programmes.47 The government-
led safety net programmes in Ethiopia and Kenya mentioned above provide higher transfer 
values and reach more people in response to worsening food insecurity. 
3.3.3 Markets and market analysis
Markets here are taken to mean where providers exchange goods and services with 
purchasers. Markets are both physical and non-physical spaces; they can be formal and 
informal, i.e. where people sell goods without paying government taxes. Informal markets 
in low- and middle-income countries are often substantial.    
Markets may be affected by the disaster or crisis, and understanding them is important in 
designing and implementing humanitarian interventions. As one study notes: 
Market awareness should be integral in humanitarian aid decision-making, in all sectors 
and regardless of the modalities of intervention being considered. Trying to understand 
the impacts of a crisis without understanding how a market has been and will be affected 
is not to see the whole picture.48 
46   IRC, Finding Economic Opportunity in the City, p. 14.	
47	  C. O’Brien et al., Shock-responsive Social Protection Systems Research: Case Study – Social Protection and 
Humanitarian Responses to Food Insecurity and Poverty in Mali (Oxford: Oxford Policy Management, 2018). 
48	  S. Levine, Markets in Crises: The Implications for Humanitarian Action (London: ODI, 2017 (https://www.odi.org/
sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-documents/11722.pdf), p. 19.
Box 3.5  IRC’s cash transfer programme in Jordan   
IRC’s cash transfer programme in the cities of Mafraq, Irbid and Ramtha in Jordan 
provides three types of funding to assist both Syrian refugees and Jordanian 
households: unconditional payments for six months for vulnerable women, a one-
off winterisation payment for families and a one-off emergency payment for those 
especially vulnerable. Cash is distributed via ATMs and through the hawala system, 
‘a method of transferring money whereby an agent in one location distributes funds 
to recipients upon confirmation that equivalent funds have been received by his/her 
associate in another location’.47 Additional support includes counselling and discussion 
groups on managing money. A financial management training course helps with 
developing business plans, with viable proposals eligible for start-up grants.
Source: IRC, Finding Economic Opportunity in the City: Lessons from IRC’s Cash and Livelihoods Programmes in Cities 
within Lebanon and Jordan (London: IRC, 2016) (https://www.rescue.org/report/finding-economic-opportunity-city).


===== PAGE 106 =====
096    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Figure 3.3 Integrating market analysis into the different phases 
of the project cycle
Source: ICRC, Market Analysis Guidance (Geneva: ICRC, 2014).
Tool 1.1:
Secondary  
data
Tool 5.1:
Baseline market 
selection
Tool 2.1:
Long-listing
response options
Tool 5.2:
Baseline market 
mapping
Tool 2.2:
Analysing market-
related risks
Tool 5.3:
Checklists for interviews 
with target 
population, traders 
and key informants
Tool 2.3:
Analysing market-
related appropriateness 
criteria
Tool 1.2:
Secondary 
data
Tool 2.1:
Long-listing 
response 
options
Tool 2.2:
Analysing 
market-related 
appropriateness 
criteria
Tool 2.3:
Analysing 
market-related 
risks
Tool 1.3:
Secondary 
data
Tool 1.4:
Secondary 
data
Tool 1.5:
Secondary 
data
Tool 1.6:
Secondary 
data
Tool 1.7:
Interview 
with key 
informants
DQ 1.1 Which 
markets should be 
focused on?
DQ 1.2  How are 
markets structured?
DQ 1.3  What is the 
impact on the population’s 
access to markets?
DQ 1.4  What is the capacity 
of traders to respond?
DQ 1.5  Do market actors 
behave competitively?
DQ 1.6  Do macro factors 
influence the market’s 
capacity to respond?
DQ 5.1  Which market 
information is relevant when 
developing a baseline and 
predicting the likely effects of 
a chosen scenario?
DQ 5.1  How can market 
information help to identify 
potential responses?
DQ 2.1 How can market 
information help identify 
a range of potential 
response options?
DQ 2.2  How can market 
information help screen 
response options against 
appropriateness?
DQ 2.3  How can market 
information help analyse the 
feasibility of response option?
Driving questions
Driving questions
Driving questions
Driving questions
                             Assessment                                                        Response analysis                                              
Contingency planning


===== PAGE 107 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    097
Chapter 3
Tool 5.1:
Partner 
selection
Tool 5.2:
Contract 
template
Tool 3.1:
Checklist on 
secondary 
data
Tool 3.2:
Checklist 
for field 
monitors
Tool 3.3:
Organising 
primary price 
data
Tool 3.4:
Analysing 
price 
changes
Tool 3.5:
Responding 
to price 
changes
Tool 4.1:
Checklist for 
interviews with 
beneficiaries
Tool 4.2:
Market 
mapping
Tool 4.3:
Checklist for 
FGDs with 
beneficiaries 
and non-
beneficiaries
Tool 4.4:
Checklist for FGDs 
and interviews 
with traders
DQ 5.3  Which market-specific 
preparedness measures 
should be put in place?
DQ 3.1 Which prices need 
to be monitored and how 
to do it?
DQ 3.2  Have prices 
significantly changed 
and why?
DQ 3.3  How to respond to 
significant price changes?
DQ 4.1 Which market 
system have been most 
affected by the project?
DQ 4.2  Which actors have 
been affected by the project?
DQ 4.3  What has been the 
impact of the project on the 
primary beneficiaries and 
their access to the market?
DQ 4.4  What has been the 
general impact of the project 
on the traders?
Driving questions
Driving questions
Driving questions
                                                     Price monitoring                                                         Evaluation


===== PAGE 108 =====
098    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
In recent years a number of market assessment tools have been developed to help agencies 
understand markets, and how and where their interventions can be most effective. Often 
this is linked to sectoral interventions, for example where purchases can be made and at 
what point in a supply chain to intervene, for instance with shelter provision. Examples of 
market analysis tools include:
•	
ICRC’s Market Analysis Guidance (MAG) ‘provides processes and tools aimed at 
integrating market analysis into the different phases of the project cycle’ (see Figure 
3.3, page 96 and 97).
•	
CaLP’s minimum requirements for market analysis49 identifies four areas: ‘scope of 
the assessment, analysis, data collection, monitoring and ensuring validity of data’.
•	
The Emergency Market Mapping Analysis (EMMA) Toolkit, developed by Practical 
Action Consulting, IRC and Oxfam, has been widely used in a number of rapid-onset 
emergencies and protracted crises (see Box 3.6). Examples of the use of EMMA in 
urban areas can be found at https://www.emma-toolkit.org/tags/urban.
Further information on markets and crises can be found at the markets in crises discussion 
group (https://dgroups.org/dfid/mic).
49	  L. Austin and S. Chessex, Minimum Requirements for Market Analysis in Emergencies (Oxford: CaLP, 2013), p. 9.
Box 3.6  Using EMMA in Lebanon   
EMMA was used in a rapid assessment in the North and Bekaa Governorates of Lebanon 
to understand how refugees and host communities use markets to earn money, and 
how interventions could be designed that supported livelihood opportunities for both 
populations. The analysis looked at labour markets, in particular construction, the 
service sector and agricultural labour.
The analysis concluded that ‘Overall … the construction labor market system has been 
drastically impacted by the crisis in Syria and that income opportunities for refugees or 
host communities in construction are very limited. In the current context where the supply 
of labor (from refugees, Syrian migrants, and Lebanese workers) exceeds the demand 
for workers, it is not feasible to promote large-scale construction-oriented livelihood 
programs’. The report however provided recommendations concerning programmes, 
including ‘link[ing] refugees and Lebanese with employment services and trainings 
providing the necessary tools to identify and qualify for income-earning possibilities’. 
Source: EMMA Lebanon, Emergency Market Mapping and Analysis (EMMA) of the Construction Labor Market System in 
North and Bekaa, Lebanon, 2013 (https://seepnetwork.org/files/galleries/Lebanon_Labor.pdf), p.4.


===== PAGE 109 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    099
In summary, using cash in urban humanitarian response seems an easy decision: people 
living in cities survive largely by buying goods, and markets abound. The recent surge in cash 
programming bears testimony to the benefits of this approach in terms of lower transaction 
costs, increased agency for the people receiving cash assistance and the benefits to local 
economies. Of course cash, like any other approach, is not a panacea and has its limitations 
(cash programming in shelter recovery, for instance, can be questioned if technical assistance 
is reduced as a result). Where cash has been used well in urban areas, it has been part of a larger 
coordinated programme of recovery, and has been accompanied by good market analysis.
3.4 Geospatial analysis and mapping
Geospatial analysis – often translated into maps – to identify locations, concentrations 
of people and transport routes, among other things, has been used widely in urban 
humanitarian response for some time.50 More recently, Geographic Information Systems 
50	  See for example D. Smith, ‘Kosovo: Applying GIS in an International Humanitarian Crisis’, esri, 2001 
(http://www.esri.com/news/arcuser/0701/kosovo.html).
Useful resources  
P. Harvey and S. Bailey, Cash Transfer Programming in Emergencies, Good Practice 
Review 11 (London: ODI, 2011) (https://odihpn.org/resources/cash-transfer-
programming-in-emergencies/).
C. O’Brien et al., Shock-Responsive Social Protection Systems Toolkit: Appraising the Use 
of Social Protection in Addressing Largescale Shocks (Oxford: Oxford Policy Management, 
2018) (https://www.opml.co.uk/files/Publications/a0408-shock-responsive-social-
protection-systems/srsp-toolkit.pdf?noredirect=1).
The Cash Learning Partnership (http://www.cashlearning.org/resources/library).
Operational Guidance and Toolkit for Multipurpose Cash Grants, various agencies, 2015 
(http://www.cashlearning.org/downloads/operational-guidance-and-toolkit-for-
multipurpose-cash-grants---web.pdf).
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, Cash in Emergencies Toolkit, 2016 
(http://rcmcash.org/).
Cash and Market, Humanitarian Response, 2018 (https://www.humanitarianresponse.
info/en/operations/yemen/cash-and-marketing).


===== PAGE 110 =====
100    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
(GIS) have provided additional analytical capability to crisis response, combining and 
visualising spatial data in new ways.51 
This section52 discusses the development and use of GIS and mapping in humanitarian 
action. Examples are provided from Haiti, Guinea, Iraq, Syria and Nepal. This section links 
closely to a number of others, in particular assessments and profiling, which use mapping to 
visualise data (Section 3.6).
3.4.1 GIS and mapping
One of the biggest challenges for humanitarian action has been the lack of up-to-date and 
accurate maps to guide decision-making. This has changed radically as spatial data has 
entered the mainstream through the increasing availability of remote sensing (primarily 
satellite) imagery, the digitisation of a wide range of maps and the arrival of the Geospatial 
Positioning System (GPS) into civilian use. In urban areas, providing coordinated manage-
ment information linked to space, density and access is of course especially helpful.
As the internet has enabled people to connect to commercial services – most obviously 
those provided through mobile phone networks, such as Google Maps and Uber – geospatial 
analysis has become useful, not just for technical specialists working in GIS, but also the 
general public. This became clear in the response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, when 
geospatial tools combined with networked communities to enable the real-time updating of 
visual information that involved affected communities themselves.
Advances in mapping using geospatial analysis allow humanitarian actors to assess, 
plan, target and coordinate assistance more effectively and efficiently. Recent research53 
identifies three particular applications: improving situational awareness – knowing which 
organisations are operating in specific areas, what they’re doing and how to contact them; 
needs assessment – where ‘a single, integrated, localized overview of needs across all 
sectors’ can be achieved; and operational circumstances – ‘knowing the available resources 
in the region, and logistical options to deliver aid and mobilise these resources’. These are 
illustrated in the example in Box 3.7.
51	  GIS was first used in the humanitarian sector in mine action, and has also been used in the health sector, 
particularly for epidemiology.
52	  This section benefited from inputs by Paul Currion.
53	  D. Paulus et al., ‘Turning Data into Action: Supporting Humanitarian Field Workers with Open Data’ in Proceedings 
of the 15th ISCRAM Conference, Rochester, New York, 2018 (www.researchgate.net/publication/324171780_Turning_
data_into_action_supporting_humanitarian_field_workers_with_open_data), cited in H. Campbell, ‘Maps, Models and 
Data Management: Geospatial Analysis in Shelter Response’, in Global Shelter Cluster, State of Humanitarian Shelter 
and Settlements 2018 (Geneva: Global Shelter Cluster, 2018) (https://www.sheltercluster.org/resources/library/state-
humanitarian-shelter-and-settlements), p. 155.


===== PAGE 111 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    101
Box 3.7  Ushahidi and crisis mapping  
The Ushahidi platform was one of the first to take advantage of the spread of the 
internet to enhance mapping capabilities. It was created in Kenya as a means of 
monitoring violence during elections in 2008, but its deployment in Haiti following the 
2010 earthquake brought it to wider public attention and helped people recognise the 
potential of crisis mapping. Ushahidi was successful because it:
•	
Filled information gaps during the first days and weeks, before the UN and large 
organisations were operational.
•	
Provided situational information for small NGOs that did not have field presence.
•	
Helped small privately funded responses to target needs (through having access to 
up-to-date information).
•	
Provided situational awareness with a geographic precision lacking in other tools 
available to the public.
•	
Directly engaged Haitians and the Haitian diaspora.
Figure 3.4 illustrates the kind of information that was mapped, including infrastructure 
damage, hazards and security threats.
Source: Ushahidi.
Figure 3.4 Map showing camps and destroyed housing


===== PAGE 112 =====
102    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
3.4.2 Crisis mapping
Crisis mapping is undertaken by a wide range of organisations.54 These include NGOs 
providing mapping services and staff in humanitarian emergencies, for example MapAction 
(https://mapaction.org/) and CartONG (https://cartong.org), as well as volunteers working 
remotely from around the world to support responses, such as the Standby Task Force (www.
standbytaskforce.org). Crisis mapping helps organisations to coordinate better as maps can 
provide a shared awareness of who is doing what, where and when (often referred to as ‘4W’). 
Crisis mapping has expanded to include new data sources. Building on map data and satellite 
imagery, crisis mapping also includes crowd-sourced information and data collected 
by drones.55 Geospatial analysis of this kind is not exclusive to urban response, but there 
tends to be more spatial data covering a denser population over a wider range of sectors 
in urban areas. Both residents and responders also have access to and experience of richer 
communication technologies than in rural areas, creating more potential, both for faster and 
wider data collection, and for analysis to inform decision-making.
The diversity of crisis mapping initiatives can be seen in Table 3.1, which shows a sample of 
crisis mapping efforts between 2010 and 2011; there have been many more such initiatives 
since then. Because of the grassroots nature of many of these projects, there is often little 
continuity between them, and it has been difficult to track them and learn from them. 
3.4.3 Crisis mapping in urban conflict contexts
Mapping is especially helpful in conflict contexts to track changes in security conditions, 
protection issues, ‘no-go areas’ and population movements. The Urban Analysis Network 
Syria (UrbAN-S) project, operated by JIPS,56 uses mapping as a key element in its profiling. 
JIPS is working with a number of partners, including iMMAP57 and Mercy Corps, ‘to provide 
up-to-date and holistic analyses of critically-affected cities in Syria’, with the aim of providing 
usable information to local government, NGOs and UN organisations. The project uses an 
area-based approach (see Section 3.2) to gather and present information, including damage 
assessments and city profiles (see Section 3.6).58
54	  Many of these organisations are members of the International Network of Crisis Mappers: 
http://crisismapping.ning.com/.
55	  For further information on the use of drones in humanitarian emergencies, see OCHA, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in 
Humanitarian Response, OCHA Policy and Studies Series, June 2014 (https://www.unocha.org/sites/unocha/files/
Unmanned%20Aerial%20Vehicles%20in%20Humanitarian%20Response%20OCHA%20July%202014.pdf).
56	  See https://www.jips.org/jips-country/syrian-arab-republic/.
57	  See https://immap.org/.


===== PAGE 113 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    103
Table 3.1  Crisis mapping initiatives
Source: Center for Security Studies (CSS), ETH Zurich. 
Selected crisis mapping initiatives
Case
Haiti January 2010
United States April 2010
Russia July–September 2010
Japan March 2011
Libya Spring/summer 2011
URL
http://haiti.ushahidi.com
http://oilspill.labucketbrigade.org
http://russian-fires.ru
http://www.sinsai.info
http://libyacrisismap.net
Crisis
Earthquake
Deep-sea oil rig explosion
Wildfires
Earthquake/tsunami
Political crisis
Initiator
Individual/organisation
Grass roots (Louisiana Bucket 
Brigade (LABB))
Individual
Individual/organisation
Intergovernmental 
organisation (OCHA)
Main 
partners
Emergency Information 
Service (EIS), InSTEDD, 
Ushahidi, Haitian telcos, 
Tufts University, US State 
Department
Tulane University Disaster 
Resilience Academy
Russian bloggers
Georepublic Japan, 
OpenStreetMap 
Foundation Japan
UNOSAT, NetHope, 
volunteer technical 
community
Aim of the 
map
Report emergencies, 
public health issues, 
security threats, 
infrastructure damage, 
natural hazards, services
Track oil spill effects and 
response, provide visible 
testimony of community 
impacts
To link those who need 
help with those who want 
to help, listed assistance 
centres
Reports and notices 
from public and private 
officials, news on disasters, 
evacuation centres and 
requests for help
Track conflict events (armed 
confrontations, attacks, etc.), 
list needs and responses, 
track mass displacements
Who used 
the map
Emergency responders, 
diaspora communities, 
media, government 
officials
Local stakeholders (citizens, 
universities, businesses, etc.), 
media
Local stakeholders (those 
needing and offering help), 
media
Local stakeholders, diaspora 
community, public and 
private actors, media
Emergency responders, 
diaspora community, 
government officials, media
Role of the 
map
Test-ground for crisis 
mapping, better maps of 
Haiti, reference point for 
crisis responders
Provided public insight and 
accountability, information on 
clean-up efforts
Delivery of relief
Go-to map for corporations, 
government and 
organisations, created 
transparency in crisis relief
Increased situational 
awareness
Role of 
government
Core partner (US 
government)
Not directly involved, aware of 
the map, provided information
Not directly involved; 
after crisis, Civic Chamber 
of Russian Federation 
became involved
Not involved initially, 
became involved by 
submitting reports
Intergovernmental body (UN) 
involved and led the effort


===== PAGE 114 =====
104    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Two examples of crisis mapping, in relation to the Ebola response in West Africa and in the 
response to the 2015 earthquakes in Nepal, are given in Box 3.8.
Box 3.8  Crisis mapping in West Africa and Nepal   
Humanitarian Open Street Map Team and the Ebola response
The Humanitarian Open Street Map Team59  (HOT) developed from an informal group of 
volunteers into a registered non-profit organisation with full-time staff. HOT has built 
a volunteer community providing map data for humanitarian response based on Open 
Street Map (OSM) (www.openstreetmap.org). 
HOT was active during the 2014 Ebola response in West Africa. MSF-Switzerland deployed 
a GIS Officer to Guinea and acquired satellite images, but decided to outsource the 
creation of detailed maps of cities and major roads to HOT. Within three days, 244 
volunteers had mapped three priority cities, and within five they had mapped more than 
90,000 buildings, which would not have been possible for the GIS Officer working alone.60  
A review of HOT’s work found that it had been valuable in the Ebola response, particularly 
where data could be used by decision-makers to allocate resources. 
HOT has partnered with MSF and the American and British Red Cross Societies to launch 
the Missing Maps Project (https://www.missingmaps.org/), an open, collaborative 
project whereby members of the public help to map areas where humanitarian 
organisations are responding to crises. HOT has also moved beyond crisis mapping into 
community-based mapping run by implementing organisations. This is part of a wider 
trend as networked technology has enabled local communities to engage with crisis 
response in the same way as international actors, and facilitated coordination between 
actors inside and outside the crisis area, where spatial data becomes a useful focal 
point for coordination
Source: EMMA Lebanon, Emergency Market Mapping and Analysis (EMMA) of the Construction Labor Market System in 
North and Bekaa, Lebanon, 2013 (https://seepnetwork.org/files/galleries/Lebanon_Labor.pdf), p.4.
59  See https://www.hotosm.org/.
60  MSF Switzerland, GIS Support for the MSF Ebola Response in Guinea 2014, July 2014 (http://cartong.org/sites/
cartong/files/GIS%20Support%20for%20the%20MSF%20Ebola%20Response%20in%20Guinea_Case%20Study.pdf).


===== PAGE 115 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    105
Figure 3.5 (page 106) provides an example from the Shelter Cluster of mapping in Mosul in Iraq.
In summary, recent developments in geospatial technology provide valuable ways of 
visualising data in spatial terms.59 This is particularly helpful in urban contexts,60 which are 
often defined and described in physical and spatial ways. Such information can promote 
coordination efforts, as witnessed by the presence of maps on the dashboards of a number 
of cluster websites. It also provides a simplified visualisation of complex data for use by a 
wide range of actors, not least affected people themselves. Presenting maps digitally also 
allows for quick updates that can keep up with the fast-changing conditions typical of crises 
and post-disaster contexts.6162
59	
60	
61	
62	
Box 3.8  (continued)   
Post-earthquake crisis mapping in Kathmandu
In response to the 2015 earthquakes that struck Nepal, Kathmandu Living Labs (KLL)61  
launched the QuakeMap website62 to enable users to report their needs to emergency 
organisations. KLL worked with other organisations, including HOT, to understand what 
maps were needed for earthquake relief; online volunteers around the world used post-
quake satellite images to update pre-quake maps, while KLL staff scraped images of 
damage from social media and mapped the damaged city on foot. QuakeMap was used 
by search and rescue teams, emergency services, international relief agencies and the 
Nepalese army, which downloaded reports from QuakeMap every two hours, passed 
on requests for assistance to their relief division, verified reports and updated the 
database once problems were resolved.63 QuakeMap closed to new reports in July 2015, 
but KLL continued to work on mapping projects, as well as becoming involved in other 
data collection projects related to disaster risk management in Nepal.
For a further description of KLL’s work following the earthquakes, as well as other organisations, see J. McMurren et 
al., Nepal: Open Data to Improve Disaster Relief (London: ODI, 2017) (http://odimpact.org/files/case-nepal.pdf).
61  KLL is a not-for-profit civic tech company founded in 2013 following a World Bank project mapping critical 
geographical and infrastructural features in Nepal on Open Street Map. See http://www.kathmandulivinglabs.org/.
62  QuakeMap.org: http://www.kathmandulivinglabs.org/projects/quakemaporg.
63  J. McMurren et al., Nepal: Open Data to Improve Disaster Relief, Open Data for Developing Economies Case Studies, 
2017 (http://odimpact.org/files/case-nepal.pdf).


===== PAGE 116 =====
106    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Figure 3.5 Locations of shelter and non-food-items, Mosul, Iraq, 2017
Source: https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/irq_3w_shelter_nfi_mosulresponse_10oct2017_0.pdf.


===== PAGE 117 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    107
3.5 Context analysis
Context can be defined as ‘the environment and circumstances within which something 
happens and which can help to explain it’.63 The aim of context analysis is to ‘help 
humanitarian actors have a better understanding of the dynamics in a given setting’.64 To 
these ends, while closely related to other forms of analysis, such as needs and vulnerability 
assessment, context analysis is more to do with understanding the unique aspects of a 
specific location, rather than the consequences of a disaster or conflict. 
63	  L. Campbell, What’s Missing? Adding Context to the Urban Response Toolbox (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2018) 
(https://www.alnap.org/help-library/whats-missing-adding-context-to-the-urban-response-toolbox), p. 11.
64	  International Rescue Committee, Urban Context Analysis Toolkit. Guidance Note for Humanitarian Practitioners 
(London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10819IIED), p. 3.
Useful resources  
City72 Toolkit (http://toolkit.sf72.org/map/).
Crisis Mapping Program, Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, 2018 (https://hhi.harvard.edu/
research/crisis-mapping#intro).
Drones in Humanitarian Action (http://drones.fsd.ch/en/drones-in-humanitarian-action/).
Humanitarian Innovation Fund, Humanitarian Crisis Map for the Central African Republic 
(CAR), 2012 (http://www.elrha.org/hif-blog/crisis-map-car-works/).
MapAction, Field Guide to Humanitarian Mapping, 2011 (https://mapaction.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/12/mapaction_field_guide_to_humanitarian_mapping.pdf).
P. Meier and J. Leaning, Applied Technology to Crisis Mapping and Early Warning in 
Humanitarian Settings (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, 2009) 
(https://hhi.harvard.edu/publications/applied-technology-crisis-mapping-and-early-
warning-humanitarian-settings).
A. Obrecht and M. Thomas, Mapping a Response: Using Satellite Images to Aid 
Humanitarian Action (London: ODI, 2016) (http://www.elrha.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/02/alnap-HOT-Open-Aerial-Mapping-case-study-2016.pdf).
OpenStreetMap in Humanitarian Response (https://www.preparecenter.org/content/
openstreetmap-humanitarian-response).


===== PAGE 118 =====
108    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
This section65 defines and discusses context analysis. It reviews a number of context analysis 
tools and outlines stakeholder analysis, network analysis, conflict analysis and governance 
analysis. The section provides links to other sources of information and further resources. 
It links closely to other sections, in particular assessments and profiling (Section 3.6) and 
monitoring and evaluation (Section 3.10).
3.5.1 Different forms of context analysis
There are many kinds of context analysis, depending on what is being analysed. Examples 
include stakeholder analysis, market analysis, such as the Emergency Market Mapping and 
Analysis (EMMA) toolkit,66 political analysis, governance analysis and conflict analysis. There 
are also many different tools for each form of analysis: concerning conflict analysis alone, 
one recent review67 found ‘literally dozens of conflict analysis tools’.
65	  This section benefited in particular from inputs by Leah Campbell of ALNAP.
66	  EMMA is ‘an approach to assessing market systems in post-emergency contexts that aims to improve emergency 
responses by encouraging and assisting relief agencies to better understand, support and make use of local market-
systems in disaster zones’. See http://www.emma-toolkit.org/. See also Section 3.3 on cash and markets.
67	  F. Oliva and L. Charbonnier, Conflict Analysis Handbook. A Field and Headquarter Guide to Conflict Assessments 
(Turin: United Nations Systems Staff College, 2016) (https://www.unssc.org/sites/unssc.org/files/unssc_conflict_
analysis_fabio_oliva_lorraine_charbonnier.pdf).
Figure 3.6 What is context?
What
do
we
mean
by
context?
Economy and 
livelihoods
Politics and 
governance
Services and 
infrastructure
Social and cultural
Space and 
settlements
Stakeholder 
dynamics
The environment 
and circumstances 
within which 
something happens 
and which can help 
to explain it
Source: L. Campbell, What’s Missing? Adding Context to the Urban Response Toolbox (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2018) 
(https://www.alnap.org/help-library/whats-missing-adding-context-to-the-urban-response-toolbox), p. 11.


===== PAGE 119 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    109
For a discussion of context analysis, see L. Campbell, What’s Missing? Adding Context to the 
Urban Response Toolbox (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2018) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/
whats-missing-adding-context-to-the-urban-response-toolbox).
IRC’s Urban Context Analysis Toolkit, created specifically for urban situations, aims to ‘enable 
users to appreciate stakeholders, existing power relations, resource distribution, governance 
and legal frameworks, sources of livelihoods, social networks, and access to services’. The 
toolkit covers approaches to stakeholder analysis; opportunities to strengthen existing or 
for future programming; and identifying entry points for programming and risk mitigation 
strategies. See http://pubs.iied.org/10819IIED.
3.5.2 Stakeholder analysis
Many humanitarian organisations use stakeholder analysis in some form in their 
programming. Stakeholder analysis can be a ‘context tool’, but only if it is used to better 
understand the range of actors relevant, not just to one project, but to the context itself. 
Box 3.9 Urban context overview and analysis in Juba   
In 2016, World Vision undertook a context analysis in the South Sudanese capital Juba in 
order to ‘map, identify and understand the vulnerabilities faced by residents in Juba so that 
it, and other stakeholders could carry out the most efficient and effective interventions 
required by those in need’.
The study used three types of analysis: resilient systems, wellbeing mapping and gender. 
Resilience issues covered access to and use of resources and infrastructure, including 
utilities and public spaces, governance networks and social dynamics. Wellbeing mapping 
reviewed among other things wealth and income and access to public services. The gender 
analysis considered sex, age, culture and language. 
Activities included key informant interviews and focus group discussions (FGDs). Secondary 
data reviewed included reports and related literature. FGDs took place in both wealthier 
and poorer parts of Juba. FGDs and interviews were carried out with the help of trained 
field assistants. 
Programmatic recommendations for action derived from the analysis and associated 
activities included the need to ‘address social stresses and social cohesion’, ‘facilitate access 
to public services and resources’, and ‘make markets work for the poor and vulnerable’.
Source: Juba: Urban and Peri-urban Context Overview and Analysis, World Vision and the Start Network, 2017.


===== PAGE 120 =====
110    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
With this in mind, stakeholder analysis may be best described as ‘an approach, a tool or set 
of tools for generating knowledge about actors – individuals and organizations – so as to 
understand their behaviour, intentions, inter-relations and interests; and for assessing the 
influence and resources they bring to decision-making or implementation processes’.68 
Stakeholder analysis helps in understanding the interests and capacities of these actors, 
and the relationships (including conflicts, power dynamics and networks) between them 
(the range of urban stakeholders is discussed further in Section 1.5 on urban actors).
3.5.3 Network analysis
Social networks describe the connections between individuals, for example within organ-
isations and communities.69 Social Network Analysis (SNA) is the process of mapping 
these relationships.70 SNA can help humanitarian organisations understand patterns 
of interaction between stakeholders, as well as a possible lack of connections. Impact 
Initiatives is developing a toolkit specifically for urban analysis, which uses SNA to identify 
key informants who can provide contextual information about a specific area. See 
http://www.impact-initiatives.org/settlement-based-assessment-and-analysis-in-contexts-
of-displacement.
Further information about area-based approaches can be found in Section 3.2.
Figure 3.7 gives an example of the results of a stakeholder analysis from Sierra Leone.
3.5.4 Conflict analysis
Conflict analysis considers the ‘broader range of issues which contribute to a conflict situation 
and within which it occurs’.71 An example of conflict analysis is the use of Participatory Violence 
Appraisal (PVA), which aims to identify ‘both tipping points of particular types of violence 
as well as violence chains, through the voices of local people themselves’.72 Examples of 
conflict analysis can be found at https://www.wvi.org/peacebuilding-and-conflict-sensitivity/
publication/good-enough-context-analysis-rapid-response. For an example of the use of conflict 
analysis in DRC see https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/GECARR_
68	  Z. Varvasovszky and R. Brugha, ‘How to Do (Or Not to Do) … A Stakeholder Analysis’, Health Policy and Planning 
15(3), 2000 (www.alnap.org/help-library/how-to-do-or-not-to-do-a-stakeholder-analysis).
69	  IRC, Urban Context Analysis Toolkit.
70	  Ibid.
71	  Saferworld et al., Conflict-sensitive Approaches to Development, Humanitarian Assistance and Peace-building: A 
Resource Pack (London: APFO, CECORE, CHA, FEWER, International Alert and Saferworld, 2004). 
72	  See C. Moser, Understanding the Tipping Point of Urban Conflict: Participatory Methodology for Gender-based and 
Political Violence, Working Paper 2 (Manchester: University of Manchester, 2012).


===== PAGE 121 =====
Tools and approaches    |    111
Chapter 3
Context    |    111
Figure 3.7 Stakeholder analysis in Sierra Leone
Source: International Rescue Committee, Urban Context Analysis Toolkit. Guidance Note for Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10819IIED).
District 
Medical 
Officer
District 
Health 
Medical 
Team
Paramount 
Chief
Section 
Chief
Secret 
society 
head
Pastor
Town 
Chief
Children
Women
Traditional 
healer
Women’s 
leader
Men
IRC Health 
Supervisor
IRC Health 
Manager
IRC Health 
Coordinator
Nurse
Peer 
supervisor
Primary 
Health 
Unit
Community 
Health 
Worker
Minister 
of Health
National 
Ebola 
Response 
Centre
District
 Ebola 
Response 
Centre
UNICEF
DFID
Healthworkers
Community 
members
Authorities
NGOs
Donors
Formal reporting 
lines
Financial 
suypport
Non-financial 
support
Informal 
influence over
Conflict
Weak
Moderate
Strong


===== PAGE 122 =====
112    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
DRC-CaseStudy.pdf. For further information on conflict analysis more generally, see www.alnap.
org/help-library/conflictanalysis-linking-humanitarian-action-and-peacebuilding; www.alnap.
org/help-library/conflict-sensitive-approaches-todevelopment-humanitarian-assistance-
and-peacebuilding; and www.alnap.org/help-library/how-to-guide-to-conflict-sensitivity. See 
also Section 1.2.1 on conflict.
3.5.5 Governance analysis
Governance analysis aims to ‘understand the range of structures, institutions and stake-
holders/actors  that have influence over responses to an urban crisis and the power 
dynamics at play within and between formal and informal institutions’.73 Commonly used 
in the development sector, governance analysis is understood here as an umbrella term 
encompassing institutional and social analysis, power analysis and political economy 
analysis. Governance analysis is often used at macro (national) levels,74 but can also be used 
at other scales. Like the other kinds of context tools discussed here, governance analysis 
looks at trends and seeks to ‘move beyond a description of symptoms, and to understand 
the underlying causes’.75
A number of governance analysis tools exist: examples include USAID’s Democracy, 
Human Rights and  Governance  Strategic  Assessment  Framework and DFID’s Drivers of 
Change. For further information on these and other tools, see R. Nash, A. Hudson and C. 
Luttrell, Mapping Political Context: A Toolkit for Civil Society Organisations (London: ODI, 2006) 
(https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/186.pdf).
3.6 Assessments and profiling
Assessments provide the basis on which many of the key decisions in an emergency are 
made, and as such are a vital part of emergency response. Similarly, profiling is aimed at 
understanding the needs of displaced people, usually in conflict settings. Undertaking 
assessments and profiling in urban areas in relation to conflict and disasters is complex 
for many reasons: density, spread, sheer numbers of people, ‘hidden’ vulnerability (where 
people may prefer to remain invisible), and existing high levels of poverty, which makes it 
73	  A. Meaux and W. Osofisan, A Review of Context Analysis Tools for Urban Humanitarian Response (London: IIED, 2016) 
(www.alnap.org/help-library/a-review-of-context-analysis-tools-for-urban-humanitarianresponse), p. 10.
74	  E. Boak, Education in Fragile Situations: A Review of Political Economy and Conflict Analysis Literature and Tools 
(Reading: Education Development Trust, 2011). (www.alnap.org/help-library/education-in-fragile-situationsa-review-
of-political-economy-and-conflict-analysis).
75	  T. Dahl-Ostergaard et al., Lessons Learned on the Use of Power and Drivers of Change Analyses in Development 
Co-operation (Lyngby and Brighton: COWI/IDS, 2005) (www.alnap.org/help-library/lessons-learned-on-the-use-of-
power-and-drivers-of-change-analyses-in-development-co), p. 3.


===== PAGE 123 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    113
difficult to identify people in need specifically due to humanitarian circumstances (such as 
IDPs and refugees in protracted crises). 
In recent years, aid agencies and academics have done a considerable amount of work to improve 
practice and knowledge in urban assessment and profiling. This section discusses multi-sectoral 
and single-sector assessments, identifies a number of sector-specific urban assessment toolkits, 
and reviews profiling in urban displacement. The section ends by referencing assessments 
relating to urban violence. This section closely links to the sections on targeting and response 
analysis and context analysis. It also relates to Section 3.4 on geospatial analysis and mapping. 
3.6.1 Multi-sectoral assessments 
A 2017 systematic review of best practice in urban assessments recommends taking a multi-
sectoral approach: 
Sector-based vulnerability analyses and targeting approaches are ill suited to complex urban 
crises, where needs are interrelated. A population’s needs for shelter, WaSH, health, food 
security and livelihoods do not exist in isolation from one another. Rather, needs interact to 
shape vulnerability, and must thus be met with a multi-sectoral approach to guide targeting.76 
Taking a multi-sectoral approach in urban areas is also recommended in IFRC’s shelter 
assessment guidelines.77 There are however concerns about multi-sectoral assessments. For 
instance, in addressing shelter, there is a risk that needs are reduced ‘purely to the number 
of damaged buildings’, and that ‘Nuances such as markets analysis, tenure needs and spatial 
uses are therefore lost’78 (single-sector assessments are discussed further below).
A number of multi-sectoral assessment toolkits are available. Urban-specific toolkits include 
NRC’s urban multi-sector vulnerability assessment tool (UMVAT).79 This is used in displace-
ment contexts and includes advice on initial assessment planning, tool contextualisation, 
data analysis and report writing. Tools include a multi-sector questionnaire for use in KoBo 
76	  R. Patel et al., What Are the Practices to Identify and Prioritize Vulnerable Populations Affected by Urban Humanitarian 
Emergencies? A Systematic Review Protocol of Methods and Specific Tools Used to Target the Most At-Need Individuals, 
Households and/or Communities in Urban Crises (Cambridge, MA: Humanitarian Evidence Programme, Tufts University, 
2016) (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308026610_What_are_the_practices_to_identify_and_prioritize_
vulnerable_populations_affected_by_urban_humanitarian_emergencies_Systematic_review), p. 31.
77	  PASSA: Participatory Approach for Safe Shelter Awareness (Geneva: IFRC, 2011) (http://www.ifrc.org/
PageFiles/95526/publications/305400-PASSA%20manual-EN-LR.pdf).
78	  L. Babister, ‘The Grand Bargain: Challenge or Opportunity for the Shelter Sector?’, in D. Sanderson and A. Sharma 
(eds), State of the Humanitarian Shelter and Settlements Report 2018 (Geneva: IFRC and UNHCR, 2018) 
(https://www.sheltercluster.org/resources/library/state-humanitarian-shelter-and-settlements).
79	  See http://pubs.iied.org/10823IIED/?k=USA.


===== PAGE 124 =====
114    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Toolbox for mobile devices; a guidance document (including assessment methodology, 
sampling techniques, aspects to consider during contextualisation, data collection tech-
niques and approaches to trend and data analysis); focus group discussion and key informant 
checklists; and training materials. See http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/10823IIED.pdf.
Another urban-specific technical guidance is ACAPS’ Rapid Humanitarian Assessments in 
Urban Settings, which covers research questions and approaches according to a number of 
urban themes. See www.alnap.org/resource/20125.
Other multi-sectoral assessment toolkits that have an urban application include:
•	
Vulnerability and Capacity Assessment (VCA),80 a longstanding approach which ‘uses 
various participatory tools to gauge people’s exposure to and capacity to resist natural 
hazards’. VCA draws on participatory methodologies such as Participatory Rapid 
Appraisal (PRA). While often used in rural areas, VCA has strong application in urban 
settlements. IFRC’s manual Integrating Climate Change and Urban Risks into the VCA 
provides useful guidance and steps for conducting urban VCAs. See http://www.ifrc.
org/Global/Publications/disasters/reducing_risks/VCA/1260200-VCA-EN-LR2.pdf.
•	
UNHCR’s Emergency Handbook is an online, easy-to-navigate source of information 
and links. The handbook provides urban-oriented information on assessments (albeit 
of a rather general nature) according to sectors. See https://emergency.unhcr.org.
•	
The IASC’s Multi Cluster/Sector Initial Rapid Assessment (MIRA), which is intended to be 
undertaken within the first two weeks of a disaster. The aim is to enable humanitarian 
actors to ‘develop a joint strategic plan, mobilise resources and monitor the situation 
and the response’.81 There are five stages to the MIRA process: 1. Initiation; 2. Secondary 
data analysis; 3. Community-level assessments; 4. Analysis; and 5. Dissemination. See 
https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/iasc-transformative-agenda/documents-
public/multi-clustersector-initial-rapid-assessment-mira-manual.
3.6.2 Sector-specific urban assessment toolkits
A number of sectors are ‘urbanising’ their approaches. For example the Food Security and 
Livelihoods in Urban Settings Working Group has produced a number of guidance docu-
ments on conducting food security assessments in urban areas, piloting new approaches in 
a number of cities including Harare, Guatemala City and Kinshasa. See https://fscluster.org/
food-security-and-livelihoods-urban/workinggroup/food-security-and-livelihoods-urban.
80	  VCA is widely used by the IFRC and Red Cross Red Crescent National Societies: see http://www.ifrc.org/vca. It is based 
on Anderson and Woodrow’s work in developing a capacity and vulnerability analysis (CVA) tool. See M. Anderson and P. 
Woodrow, Rising from the Ashes: Development Strategies in Times of Disaster (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1989).
81	  IASC Multi Cluster/Sector Initial Rapid Assessment (MIRA), 2012 (https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/documents/
mira_final_version2012.pdf), p. 3.


===== PAGE 125 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    115
A number of learning products have emerged around the use of cash and assessments. 
Although developed primarily as a guide to implementing cash transfers in urban contexts, 
Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Emergencies,82 published by the Cash Learning 
Partnership (CaLP), includes advice on how existing assessment tools can be applied to 
urban contexts. See http://www.cashlearning.org/downloads/resources/calp/CaLP_Urban_
Toolkit_web.pdf.
3.6.3 Profiling in urban displacement 
Profiling can be defined as ‘The collaborative process of identifying internally displaced 
groups or individuals through data collection, including counting, and analysis, in order to 
take action to advocate on their behalf, to protect and assist them and, eventually, to help 
bring about a solution to their displacement’.83
In urban areas, profiling has been used to ‘obtain better information about the range of 
experiences, needs and capacities of the displaced, their host families and their non-
displaced neighbours in urban settings’.84 The Global Alliance for Urban Crises identifies six 
elements of urban profiling:85
82	  T. Cross and A. Johnston, Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Emergencies: A Toolkit for Practitioners, CaLP, 2011 
(http://www.urban-response.org/resource/7056).
83	  IDMC and OCHA, Guidance on Profiling Internally Displaced Persons (Geneva: IDMC/OCHA, 2008) 
(http://www.internal-displacement.org/publications/guidance-on-profiling-internally-displaced-persons). 
84	  JIPS, Guidance for Profiling Urban Displacement Situations: Challenges and Solutions, Joint IDP Profiling Service, 
2014 (https://www.jips.org/files/818).
85	  P. Sitko and A. Massella, Urban Profiling for Better Responses to Humanitarian Crises, Global Alliance for Urban 
Crises, 2019 (http://www.urbancrises.org/downloads).
Box 3.10 The Syria Needs Analysis Project   
The Syria Needs Analysis Project (SNAP) was undertaken by ACAPS and MapAction from 2012 
to 2015. The aim was to provide information to operational agencies working with Syrian 
refugees living in urban areas of Jordan. Particular challenges included limited information 
and a fast-changing situation. In this context, SNAP aimed to contribute to improved 
targeting and more efficient responses by providing capacity-building and technical support 
for undertaking assessments. Key activities included secondary data reviews within multi-
sector needs analyses, producing scenarios relating to different political and conflict-related 
outcomes (in order to enable better planning) and analysis of sectors.
Source: SNAP: Syria Needs Analysis Project (https://www.acaps.org/sites/acaps/files/products/files/1_s-snap-
summary-of-work-dec-2012-june-2015.pdf).


===== PAGE 126 =====
116    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
1.	 The use of spatial analysis, wherein ‘[urban] conditions are analyzed at granular 
levels to be able to understand the specific challenges of different neighborhoods 
and the types of short and long-term responses required’. 
2.	 Prioritising a people-centred approach – ‘The needs of specific population groups must 
be analyzed both on their own and in relation to the urban population as a whole’.
3.	 Recognising change over time, i.e. noting history and ‘Comparing present 
vulnerabilities with past conditions’.
4.	 Analyse the entirety of a city, noting in particular the interlinked nature of systems. 
5.	 Collaborative action ‘for a more coherent and coordinated response’.
6.	 Local ownership: ‘Bringing in local stakeholders both as drivers of the process as 
well as conveners of expertise can vastly enrich the usefulness of the data and the 
quality of the analysis’.
For further discussion and elaboration and lessons from practice, see P. Sitko and A. 
Massella, Urban Profiling For Better Responses To Humanitarian Crises, Global Alliance for 
Urban Crises, 2019 (http://www.urbancrises.org/downloads).
Undertaking a profiling exercise can be expensive and complex. Clarity among actors on 
the purpose and scope of the work is important. One study found that, in profiling under-
taken in the Middle East, ‘many of the people involved did not realise at the beginning that 
the extensive data-collection and analysis exercises undertaken would not directly result 
in a useable targeting tool’ leading to ‘widespread frustration at the perceived slowness 
of the process’.86 Supporters of profiling argue that it is necessary in order to better tailor 
responses to assist displaced people in complex urban environments. According to the 
Joint IDP Profiling Service (JIPS), profiling comprises:
•	
A process of data gathering, beginning with building consensus on what needs to be 
gathered and how, with a validation at the end by relevant stakeholders.
•	
Collaboration is important, among key stakeholders such as government and 
NGOs. In this respect, profiling is an important means of engaging with affected 
communities.87
86	  K. Sharp, Targeting Cash and Food Assistance for Syrian Refugees in Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt: Issues Emerging, 
Lessons Being Learned, Consultancy report for UNHCR and WFP, June 2015.
87	  See for example J. Basedow, C. Westrope and A. Meaux, Urban Stakeholder Engagement and Coordination: 
Guidance Note for Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) (pubs.iied.org/pdfs/10821IIED.pdf). 


===== PAGE 127 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    117
•	
Comparing displaced and non-displaced communities in order to improve targeting. 
•	
Data is disaggregated, e.g. by location, gender and age.
JIPS is an inter-agency service established in 2009 to provide technical support to 
government, humanitarian and development actors seeking to improve their information 
about internally displaced populations. See http://www.jips.org/.
Profiling toolkits include:
•	
The JIPS Essential Toolkit (JET) provides online tools including questionnaires, data 
collection and data analysis approaches for profiling. See https://jet.jips.org/.
•	
Developing a Profiling Methodology for Displaced People in Urban Areas88 provides 
profiling tools and training modules for use by implementing organisations.
•	
The Profiling and Assessment Resource Kit (PARK) is an online database of docu-
ments, tools and guidelines for profiling and joint assessment activities. See 
http://www.parkdatabase.org/.
•	
UN-Habitat’s City Resilience Profiling Programme (CRPP) ‘focuses on providing 
national and local governments with tools for measuring and increasing resilience 
to multi-hazard impacts, including those associated with climate change’. The aim 
is to ‘develop a comprehensive and integrated urban planning and management 
approach for profiling and monitoring the resilience of any city to all plausible hazards’. 
See 
https://unhabitat.org/urban-initiatives/initiatives-programmes/city-resilience-
profiling-programme/. UN-Habitat’s City Resilience Profiling Tool can be found at 
http://urbanresiliencehub.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/CRPT-Guide.pdf.
88	  K. Jacobsen and R. Nichols, Developing a Profiling Methodology for Displaced People in Urban Areas Final Report 
(Cambridge, MA: Tufts University, 2011) (https://www.preparecenter.org/sites/default/files/78668794-developing-a-
profiling-methodology-for-displaced-people-in-urban-areas.pdf).
 
Box 3.11 Profiling refugee groups and local communities in Delhi  
In 2013, JIPS and the Feinstein International Center undertook a profiling exercise of Afghan, 
Burmese, Somali and Indian households in the same neighbourhoods in the Indian capital 
Delhi. The aim was to identify differences in vulnerabilities. The findings indicated that 
vulnerabilities were indeed different. For example, Burmese and Somali refugees had more 
difficulty finding housing and jobs than Afghans and Indians. 
Source: JIPS, Guidance For Profiling Urban Displacement Situations: Challenges and Solutions, Joint IDP Profiling 
Service, 2014 (https://www.jips.org/files/818), p. 24.


===== PAGE 128 =====
118    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
3.6.4 Undertaking assessments relating to urban violence
Assessments in relation to urban violence inevitably need careful planning. The ALNAP 
Lessons Paper Humanitarian Interventions in Situations of Urban Violence89 recommends and 
discusses a number of steps, such as the need to carefully assess local needs and strengths, 
to conduct repeat assessments and to use a combination of quantitative and qualitative 
methods. See also Section 1.2.1 on urban violence.
In summary, assessments are vital to effective programming in post-disaster and conflict 
situations. A range of tools exist, and more are almost certainly on the way as knowledge 
and expertise in urban programming continue to develop. Multi-sectoral assessments are 
considered good practice, though these may not always be the ‘right’ approach in every 
context. The visualisation of data through maps and spatial analysis is an important aspect. 
Profiling is also increasingly gaining recognition as a valuable tool for ‘rooting’ humanitarian 
action within specific contexts.
3.7 Targeting 
Targeting is used to direct limited humanitarian resources to those who need them most. It 
is closely associated with response analysis, context analysis and assessments and profiling, 
which are discussed in other sections of this review.
This section defines urban targeting, identifies urban targeting challenges and discusses 
targeting methods. The section ends with the steps involved in urban targeting approaches. 
An example is given of using cash-based indicators for urban targeting. 
3.7.1 Defining targeting and targeting challenges
Targeting can be defined as ‘the process by which individuals or groups are identified and 
selected for humanitarian assistance programmes, based on their needs and vulnerability. 
It is a way to focus limited resources on those within the population that would most 
benefit from support’.90
Targeting in urban areas is fraught with complexity. Vulnerability may well be hidden – 
those seemingly living well may be in chronic debt, or unable to sustain livelihoods (see 
the example from Syria in Box 3.10). Conversely, those who may appear to be vulnerable 
89	   For further information see E. Lucchi, Humanitarian Interventions in Situations of Urban Violence, ALNAP Lessons 
Paper (London: ODI, 2013) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/alnap-lessons-paper-humanitarian-interventions-in-
settings-of-urban-violence).
90	  G. Smith, L. Mohiddin and L. Phelps, Targeting in Urban Displacement Contexts: Guidance Note for Humanitarian 
Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10826IIED).


===== PAGE 129 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    119
may well not be (a single-headed, unemployed household may be receiving remittances, 
for instance). Accurate baseline vulnerability data may not be available, which can 
exacerbate the challenge of distinguishing between those with humanitarian needs from 
those who are in chronic need (for example the chronically poor). In adhering to a strict 
interpretation of humanitarian need (in order to ‘focus limited resources on those within 
the population that would most benefit from support’, as noted in the definition above), 
one review91 recommends that clear targeting objectives are essential: ‘Many high-risk 
and rapidly growing urban environments are characterized by widespread need and 
endemic problems and deficits of development in the absence of any acute crisis. Targeting 
vulnerable populations in such urban areas affected by crises cannot be an open invitation 
to permanent missions or demand that all pre-existing needs or deficits of development 
are met. Clear objectives and exit strategies must be employed’.92 
A 2017 guidance note, Targeting in Urban Displacement Contexts,93 makes the following 
useful observations concerning urban targeting. First, that targeting is imperfect: 
‘all [targeting activities] will generate errors of inclusion and exclusion’. Second, that 
targeting requires trade-offs, for example in cost and coverage, and in the time required 
to undertake targeting and the quality of information gathered. Third, that it is important 
to remain pragmatic – ‘practitioners should select the mechanism that allows for the 
rationing and prioritisation of assistance to meet needs as quickly, fairly and transparently 
as possible’. Fourth, to use mixed methods – ‘given the scale of need and the limitations of 
each targeting mechanism, it is considered best practice to use more than one targeting 
mechanism in combination so as to reduce errors and further prioritise resources’.
Concerning displacement situations, one study on urban targeting94 identifies the following 
challenges:
•	
The complex nature and heterogeneity of urban vulnerability – there is no easy 
distinction between ‘the vulnerable’ and those who are ‘not vulnerable’: most 
households may be considered vulnerable to varying degrees.
•	
Accurate data can be limited, biased or non-existent, for instance where a munici-
pality has poor records or there have been recent population movements or rapid 
91	  R. Patel et al., What Are the Practices to Identify and Prioritize Vulnerable Populations Affected by Urban 
Humanitarian Emergencies? A Systematic Review Protocol of Methods and Specific Tools Used to Target the Most At-need 
Individuals, Households and/or Communities in Urban Crises (Cambridge, MA: Humanitarian Evidence Program, Tufts 
University, 2016) (https://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/what-are-the-practices-to-identify-and-prioritize-
vulnerable-populations-affect-605166).
92	  Ibid., p. 32.
93	  Smith, Mohiddin and Phelps, Targeting in Urban Displacement Contexts. 
94	  Ibid.


===== PAGE 130 =====
120    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
population growth. Records concerning informal settlements in particular may be 
missing or inaccurate.
•	
Extensive chronic poverty – for example, many people live below the Sphere minimum 
standards, for instance regarding water availability (see Section 3.1 on standards) 
even without a crisis.
•	
Targeting and assessments may be open to manipulation (see Section 2.2 on 
corruption).
•	
Urban populations are often fluid, for example because of seasonal rural-to-urban 
migration, intra-urban migration and rapid population growth.
3.7.2 Methods for targeting
A systematic review looking at best practice in urban assessments95 identified the follow-
ing methods for targeting vulnerable urban populations affected by conflict, disasters and 
displacement. 
Targeting by displacement or disaster-affected status, i.e. IDPs or refugees versus host 
populations. This approach can be problematic as it may create resentment, for instance 
among people not assisted. Evidence suggests that both host and refugee populations 
should be included given the prevalence of extensive chronic urban poverty, which often 
leads to similar vulnerabilities among both groups.96
Using locally derived assessment tools, incorporating local voices, leading to context-specific 
indicators that may be more precise and accurate. Recognising the complexity and hetero-
geneity of urban areas, the review concludes that ‘Evidence suggests locally contextualized 
tools may represent best practice going forward’.97 It is noted, however, that this takes time 
and is resource-intensive. One example of such an approach98 is from Ethiopia, where a 
screening tool was developed to rapidly identify female refugee survivors of GBV in order to 
target services better. The tool was developed through interviews and focus group discussions. 
95	  Patel et al., What Are the Practices to Identify and Prioritize Vulnerable Populations Affected by Urban 
Humanitarian Emergencies?
96	  See for example Under Pressure: The Impact of the Syrian Refugee Crisis on Host
Communities in Lebanon, World Vision, 2013 (https://assets.worldvision.org.uk/files/1413/7363/8729/Lebanon_Report_
UNDER_PRESSURE_WV.pdf).
97	  Patel et al., What Are the Practices to Identify and Prioritize Vulnerable Populations Affected by Urban 
Humanitarian Emergencies?, p. 31.
98	  A. Wirtz, N. Glass et al. (2013) ‘Development of a Screening Tool to Identify Female Survivors of Gender-based 
Violence in a Humanitarian Setting: Qualitative Evidence from Research among Refugees in Ethiopia’, Conflict and 
Health 7(1), 2013, cited in Patel et al., What Are the Practices to Identify and Prioritize Vulnerable Populations Affected 
by Urban Humanitarian Emergencies?


===== PAGE 131 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    121
Targeting by demographic category, such as gender, age, ability and ethnicity. While there 
are benefits of such an approach in terms of transparency and ease, entire groups who 
may be vulnerable can be overlooked. For example, ‘In Syria, unaccompanied Iraqi men 
living in Damascus were not considered for resettlement, despite lacking family or local 
networks’.99 There is also a risk of being perceived as partisan. One study from Somalia 
reported that ‘Targeting is another extremely difficult exercise in Mogadishu. The Somali 
clan and sub-clan system is such that aid organisations run the risk of being seen as the 
enemy by one side if they provide aid to another, making needs-based targeting and the 
allocation of aid a risky endeavour’.100 
Using pre-existing administrative data. The risk here is that data may be inaccurate, destroyed 
or biased. ACAPS notes that ‘The civil wars in Sierra Leone and Liberia, and the 2010 Haiti 
earthquake and 2008 Typhoon Fengshen in Manila, saw the destruction of physical data’.101 
Self-targeting, wherein people identify themselves as vulnerable, and, for example, may seek 
help at an office. Drawing on examples from Syria and Somalia, the review found that ‘self-
targeting is unlikely to reach the most vulnerable who may wish to remain hidden and proved 
expensive and difficult to maintain long term or to transition to local authorities’.102 In DRC, 
UNHCR and partner agencies used self-identification as one targeting approach for girls 
engaging in survival sex.103 Programme staff made contact with girls who were known to 
frequent specific areas. Staff encouraged girls to introduce them to their friends; support 
included protection, health and economic help.  
Community-based targeting, wherein communities themselves identify who is vulnerable. 
Effective participatory assessments involve affected populations learning about needs and 
capacities alongside agencies. For example, following Typhoon Haiyan the NGO ActionAid 
undertook PRA exercises to enable communities to identify their needs and present them 
to NGOs.104 Community-based targeting must be well-planned, with adequate training 
provided. Problems can arise when this is not the case. One programme by Oxfam and 
Concern in Nairobi, for example, relied on local community members – community health 
99	  S. Haysom and S. Pavanello, Sanctuary in the City? Urban Displacement and Vulnerability in Damascus, HPG 
Working Paper (London: ODI, 2011).
100	 F. Grünewald, ‘Aid in a City at War: The Case of Mogadishu, Somalia’, Disasters 36(1), 2012.
101	  ACAPS, Rapid Humanitarian Assessments in Urban Settings: Technical Brief, 2015 (www.alnap.org/
resource/20125), p. 20.
102	  Patel et al., What Are the Practices to Identify and Prioritize Vulnerable Populations Affected by Urban 
Humanitarian Emergencies?, p. iii.
103	 This example is from Smith, Mohiddin and Phelps, Targeting in Urban Displacement Contexts, p. 46.
104	 Sanderson and Delica Willison, Philippines Typhoon Haiyan Response Review. 


===== PAGE 132 =====
122    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
workers – to identify beneficiaries.105 A validation survey found substantial evidence 
of inclusion error, indicating that the health workers did not correctly identify the most 
vulnerable households.106 Problems included a preference for including friends or relatives 
and a lack of incentives to make the extra effort to uncover every vulnerable household in 
their area, as they did not receive compensation.107
105   T. Cross and A. Johnston, Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Emergencies: A Toolkit for Practitioners, CaLP, 2011 
(http://www.urban-response.org/resource/7056).	
106   MacAuslan and Farhat, Review of Urban Food Security Targeting Methodology and Emergency Triggers.
107	 I. MacAuslan and M. Farhat, Review of Urban Food Security Targeting Methodology and Emergency Triggers. Final 
Report, Oxfam, 2013, cited in Smith, Mohiddin and Phelps, Targeting in Urban Displacement Contexts, p. 52.
Box 3.12  Using cash-based indicators for urban targeting  
CaLP’s Urban Toolkit on cash programming notes that good practice in urban targeting 
‘requires clear definition of urban-specific vulnerability criteria, a selection process 
that prioritises the neediest families, and a verification process that can ensure that 
exclusion and inclusion errors are corrected transparently and quickly’.106 
Given the critical role that markets play in meeting the needs of urban residents, chronic 
and widespread poverty and its link with vulnerability and the growing use of cash 
and market-based approaches in humanitarian response, income- or poverty-related 
measures might be particularly useful targeting criteria. Various indicators may be used, 
each with their own pros and cons:107 
•	
Livelihoods and income. Income is critical in urban areas but hard to measure 
directly, hence the use of proxies. Questions on type of employment are more likely to 
succeed and are often useful. Questions on debt are important but can be unreliable 
and sometimes ambiguous.
•	
Expenditure. This is highly relevant information but hard and time-consuming to 
collect. Proxies are easier.
•	
Assets and housing. This information can be relatively easy to gather and reliable 
because it can be verified by targeting teams, but may not be well correlated to poverty 
following an emergency (therefore reducing the usefulness of proxy means tests).
•	
Receipt of assistance from formal or informal sources. This information is usually 
highly relevant but can be difficult to interpret in contexts where informal sharing of 
resources is common.
Finally, regardless of poverty measures, the coping strategies used by individuals and 
households may be a better reflection of their vulnerability, but may not be captured 
by the measures listed above. A scale based on locally contextualised coping strategies 
may allow for a more holistic assessment of vulnerability and thus guide targeting.


===== PAGE 133 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    123
Area-based targeting, where neighbourhoods or wider administrative areas are selected. 
Criteria for this may vary, such as levels of damage following a disaster or conflict, pre-
existing activities by aid agencies (which may want to continue working in the same 
area); negotiations within coordination meetings to assign activities; and level of legality 
(host governments may for instance not give permission for agencies to work in informal 
settlements). Area-based approaches are discussed further in Section 3.2.
For further discussion of these methods, see R. Patel et al., What Are the Practices to 
Identify and Prioritize Vulnerable Populations Affected by Urban Humanitarian Emergencies? 
A Systematic Review Protocol of Methods and Specific Tools Used to Target the Most At-need 
Individuals, Households and/or Communities in Urban Crises (Cambridge, MA: Humanitarian 
Evidence Programme, Tufts University, 2016) (https://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/
publications/what-are-the-practices-to-identify-and-prioritize-vulnerable-populations-
affect-605166).
Cash programming is discussed further in Section 3.3.
3.7.3 Steps in urban targeting
The guidance note Targeting in Urban Displacement Contexts108 provides principles for 
targeting criteria and decision-making tools. Figure 3.8 (page 124), from the guidance note, 
illustrates five steps in urban targeting in relation to the project management cycle.
In summary, good targeting involves trade-offs, including time, affordability, quality of 
data and achieving something ‘good enough’ for informed programming. Transparency 
concerning ‘who is getting what and why’ is critical. 
3.8 Response analysis
Response analysis is essentially what follows assessments and other activities such as 
profiling, where findings are reviewed, leading to programme design. During response 
analysis, programme options are decided.109 Response analysis should include a 
consideration of elements such as costs and benefits, actors’ engagement and capacity, risk 
analysis and technical feasibility. Good response analyses therefore are used to engage a 
large number of stakeholders. Response analyses can be wide-ranging and complex, and 
in urban areas need to be managed, in order to be realistic in terms of timeframe, scope, 
numbers and types of actors engaged with (the list can verge on limitless) and complexity. 
108	 Smith, Mohiddin and Phelps, Targeting in Urban Displacement Contexts.
109	 D. Maxwell et al., Response Analysis and Response Choice in Food Security Crises: A Roadmap, Network Paper 73 
(London: ODI, 2013) (https://odihpn.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/NP73.pdf).


===== PAGE 134 =====
124    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	 Verification processes
•	 Communication and feedback 
mechanisms including appeal and 
redress process
•	 Monitoring
•	 Checklist to guide programming
•	 Annex D; Methodological guidance for 
implementing CBT and Scorecards
Programme 
Management 
Cycle
Response analysis 
– defining priorities 
and objectives for 
programmes
Monitoring
Programme 
implementation
Programme 
design and 
implementation 
set up
Step 5: Manage 
and monitor 
targeting 
implementation
Section 7
Step 1: 
Assessment 
and anlysis
Section 3
Step 3: Establish 
targeting critria
Section 5
(supporting 
Tool 1)
Step 4: Choose 
the targeting 
mechanism(s)
Section 6
(supporting Tool 2 
and 3)
(Annex D)
Source: G. Smith, L. Mohiddin and L. Phelps, Targeting in Urban Displacement Contexts: Guidance Note for 
Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10826IIED), p. 12.
Figure 3.8  Five steps in urban targeting
Assessment – 
understanding 
needs and 
vulnerabilities


===== PAGE 135 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    125
•	 Linkages between assessment, response analysis and 
targeting
•	 How to design and implement vulnerability assessments 
to inform targeting
•	 How to use response anaysis findings to inform targeting
•	 Checklist to guide programming
•	 Defining vulnerability; types of vulnerability criteria; their 
appropriateness for targeting multi-sectorial assistance 
in urban contexts; key considerations for their use
•	 How to identify vulnerability critria
•	 Checklist to guide programming
•	 Supporting tool 1: Selecting targeting indicators
•	 Overarching considerations when selecting the targeting 
mechanism
•	 The range of targeting mechanisms; the main 
advantages and risks of these in an urban context and 
possible solutions; guidance on the step by step process 
for geographical targeting
•	 Checklist to guide progeamming
•	 Supporting tool 2: Selecting targeting mechanisms
•	 Supporting tool 3: Geographical vulnerability indicators
•	 Annex D: Methodological guidance for implementing 
CBT and Scorecards
•	 Benefits and risks of blanket distribution
•	 Checklist to guide programming
Step 2: Decide 
whether to target
Section 4


===== PAGE 136 =====
126    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
This section identifies the challenges of undertaking an urban response analysis. It presents 
a number of response analysis frameworks that are applicable to post-conflict urban 
contexts. It presents an urban-specific response analysis tool, and provides two examples 
of sectoral response analysis frameworks, for food security and cash programming.
3.8.1 Challenges of undertaking an urban response analysis
Response analyses can be large, take substantial time and resources and require 
research expertise. In one example, of a food security response analysis in East Africa, 
activities comprised ‘an extensive literature review as well as qualitative interviews with 
approximately 150 key informants. Interviews were conducted with headquarters and field 
level staff (Ethiopia, Somalia and Kenya) of a variety of local, national and international 
NGOs, international NGOs, UN agencies, the Red Cross movement, global experts, as well as 
national government and donor officials’.110
Response analyses (as with almost any other approach) can be susceptible to misuse, 
however unwittingly. One study concluded that:
The term ‘response analysis’ implies that response choices are made solely on the basis 
of evidence and analysis. However, many factors contribute to how agencies select a 
response, and ‘response choice’ does not always involve an evidence-based, analytical 
process. Research … suggests that response choices are also driven by the capacity and 
organisational ethos of the implementing agency, the personal experience of programme 
staff and a range of external factors, including donor resources and policy, government 
policy in the recipient country, media and political influences, the costs of reporting and 
compliance associated with different resources, the capacity of partner organisations 
and considerations (or assumptions) about the risks associated with different responses. 
Sometimes the complexity of the context can severely constrain response options.111
Other challenges include:
•	
Engaging stakeholders adequately, which takes time and effort. Stakeholders can 
be various and there can be a large number of them. They can include (but are not 
limited to) municipal water and electricity utilities, private providers acting as utilities 
(water, electricity, sanitation services), health structures, neighbourhood associations, 
criminal gangs/organisations, the police, political parties and religious associations.
•	
Spending time on response analysis rather than addressing the immediate needs of 
vulnerable people.
110	 Ibid., p. 1.
111	 Ibid.


===== PAGE 137 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    127
Response analysis 
framework
Brief description
Disaster phase and sectors covered
Conflict-specific?
Refugee Coordination Model 
(RCM), UNHCR 
UNHCR Handbook (https://
emergency.unhcr.org/
entry/60930)
Sector leads undertake response analysis in close collaboration with 
UNHCR, developing the Refugee Response Plan. The role of UNHCR 
in ensuring appropriate implementation of the response analysis 
process is not very clear. 
OCHA follows a similar decentralised approach whereby cluster leads 
in consultation with their members identify responses.
Although the RCM is not designed for urban contexts, it would utilise 
information from the analysis of urban contexts. However, there is 
no guidance on how to apply these processes to an urban context in 
which the stakeholders and contextual aspects such as conflict may 
require greater sensitivity.
Phases: All refugee situations and 
throughout a refugee response, whether it is 
in a new or protracted emergency, or located 
in a camp, rural dispersed or in urban 
settings or in mixed situations. 
Sectors: Multiple sectors depending on 
results from needs assessments.  
Inherently, as UNHCR has 
a protection mandate. 
However, the needs 
assessment for refugee 
emergencies (NARE) and 
related needs assessment 
guidance does not provide 
robust guidance on how to 
respond in such contexts.
Multi-Sector Response Analysis 
Framework (draft) 
Save the Children, 2015
(not available online)
The MSRA is designed to facilitate the consolidation of sector 
assessment data into a multi-sector analysis process, and as such 
responsibility lies with sector specialists or assessment and analysis 
specialists, in line with standard humanitarian programme planning. 
Therefore, ensuring the engagement of any additional leadership and/
or decision-makers in the process. The MSRA is relatively new and has 
not yet been field-tested. 
To be used in conjunction with the Operational Guidance and Toolkit 
for Multi-Purpose Cash Grants (ERC, 2015).
Phases: All phases. 
Sector: Multi-sector approach using 
expenditure basket calculations.
Not specifically. However, 
relevant tools are 
suggested.
Response Management 
Procedure 
Save the Children, 2016
(not available online)
Although not a framework per se, this procedure is designed to guide 
Response Team Leaders and Deputy Response Team Leaders through 
the key actions and processes of managing a Save the Children 
response, from launch to close or transition. 
Essentially an internal tool, providing step-by-step guidance and 
checklists to support the implementation of an accountable, quality 
and timely response. There is clarity as to who is involved in the 
various stages of developing a response strategy, [but there is] less 
information on how decisions related to responses are made.
Phases: All phases. 
Sectors: Multi-sector approach.
Not specifically. 
However, relevant tools are 
suggested.
Table 3.2  Frameworks that can be adapted to urban post-conflict contexts
Source: L. Mohiddin, G. Smith and L. Phelps, Urban Response Analysis Framework (URAF). Guidance Note for Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.
org/10824IIED), p. 15.


===== PAGE 138 =====
128    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Box 3.13  NRC’s Urban Response Analysis Framework  
NRC’s Urban Response Analysis Framework (URAF) aims to provide an urban-specific 
multi-sectoral response analysis tool for use in situations where people have been 
displaced. The intention of the URAF is to identify which needs should be prioritised 
in multi-sector programmes, and which populations should be targeted; define 
programme objectives, response modalities and delivery mechanisms; and identify 
programme- and context-related indicators for monitoring. The URAF comprises six 
steps, which are given, along with outputs, in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9 The URAF’s six steps
Source: Mohiddin, Smith and Phelps, Urban Response Analysis Framework.
Step 1: Have the urban population’s multi-sector needs and vulnerabilities been assessed?
Output: Multi-sector needs assessment data for specific group and/or area
Step 2: Who are the population(s) in need? What are their priority?
Output: Multi-sector needs assessment data for specific group and/or area
Step 3: What opportunities and limitations exist in the internal and external 
operational environment?
Output: Operational context overview and SWOT analysis
Step 4: What are the programme objectives, potential response options, 
modalities and delivery mechanisms?
Output: Programme objectives, potential multi-sector responses and assumptions
Step 5: What response options, modalities and delivery mechanisms are recommended?
Output: Multi-sector programme response decisions, monitoring indicators
Step 6: To maintain response appropriateness what needs to be monitored?
Output: Multi-sector programme response decisions, monitoring indicators


===== PAGE 139 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    129
•	
Needs can be extremely complex, making meaningful analysis difficult.
•	
Needs and issues may change rapidly, potentially rendering an analysis that is not 
sufficiently flexible out of date.
•	
The risk of doing harm, for instance by using out of date findings or not engaging 
sufficiently with relevant stakeholders.
3.8.2 Different response analysis frameworks
There are a number of different frameworks relating to conflict and disasters. Table 3.2 
presents a number of response analysis frameworks that can be applied to post-conflict 
situations in urban areas, though none has been specifically designed for urban use.
3.8.3 Sectoral response analyses
Response analyses can be used to investigate the most appropriate delivery mechanisms in 
particular sectors (while recognising that sectors need to work closely together and multi-
sectoral responses are important, as discussed in Section 3.2 on area-based approaches and 
referred to elsewhere in this Good Practice Review). Examples below concern food security 
and cash programming.
Food security
Figure 3.10 identifies the steps undertaken in response analysis, and where it appears in 
the programme management cycle. The example concerns food security needs following a 
rapid-onset disaster, or in preparation for a declining food situation where an early warning 
has been given. Cross-cutting considerations are indicated.
Cash programming
The following example from UNHCR identifies high-level critical decisions concerning the 
use of cash. The analysis is based on asking simple and clear questions, leading to a decision 
on the best modality for cash delivery based on the particular circumstances. 
Cash-based programming is discussed further in Section 3.3.


===== PAGE 140 =====
130    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Figure 3.10 A roadmap for response analysis
Source: D. Maxwell et al., Response Analysis and Response Choice in Food Security Crises: A Roadmap, Network Paper 73 
(London: ODI, 2013) (https://odihpn.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/NP73.pdf).
Needs assessment
•	 Prevalence (who, how many, 
how severe?)
•	 ‘Gap’ (how much, how long?)
•	 Spatial/temporal dimension 
(where, when?)
(Baseline vulnerability)
Causal analysis
•	 Underlying causes (why?)
•	 Trends (direction over time?)
Cross-cutting considerations
Procurement (LRP)	
Access/security	
Capacity	
Recipient preference	
Logistics
Government policy	
Partnerships	
Risk assessment	
Lessons learned/M&E	
Gender
Proposal writing/detailed programme design
Programme 
design
Situation analysis
Response analysis
First-order options
1	 Assistance to protect 
consumption? 
(Food assistance)
2	 Assistance to protect 
nutritional status? 
(Nutrition support)
3	 Assistance to protect 
income/production? 
(Livelihoods support)
4	 Other forms of support? 
(Water, health)
Second-order options
•	 General food 
distribution
•	 Market (cash/
vouchers)
•	 SFP/TFP; IYCF; 
micro-nutrient 
programmes
•	 Livelihood 
assistance/resilience
•	 Asset protection
•	 Other
Third-order options
•	 Conditionality 
•	 Targeting
•	 Fairs or shop-
based
•	 Food/nutrition 
products
•	 Food basket/
value of transfer
Shock or 
early 
warning


===== PAGE 141 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    131
Figure 3.11  UNHCR cash delivery assessment tool
Are FSPs present already or 
willing to set up an operation 
in the programme area
Do any of your partners have 
the capacity to manage cash 
transfers efficiently
Does the 
organisation 
have the 
capacity to 
manage cash 
transfers 
efficiently?
Are FSPs fully 
regulated?
Ask
Investigate
Consider
Are electronic 
transfer options 
available
Can bank accounts 
be opened 
for person of 
concern?
Delivery through 
agents (Over-the-
Counter
Do mobile money 
bulk payment 
options exist?
Are card-
based options 
available?
Cash Direct 
Payment by 
Organisation
Delivery through 
agents (Over-the-
Counter)
Accounts/
Wallets
Bank 
accounts
Post Office, 
MTA, etc.
Mobile 
money
Smart 
cards
Prepaid
cards
This option is more 
flexible but may 
be more costly/
complex to procure
Ask simple 
questions before 
moving ahead
Try and find out 
more
Conduct a more 
in-depth assessment 
to make a final 
decision
This option is often 
the cheapest and 
fastest to procure
CBI is not 
feasible 
at this 
stage
Consider
Consider
Consider
Investigate
Investigate
Investigate
Consider
Ask
Ask
Ask
Ask
Ask
Ask
Ask
Consider
Consider
Consider
Consider
MFIs, traders, 
hawalas, etc.
IP Cash 
Direct 
Payment
Cash Direct 
Payment
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
or
or
No
No
Source: UNHCR, Cash Delivery Mechanism Assessment Tool (www.unhcr.org/uk/protection/livelihoods/5899ebec4/
cash-delivery-mechanism-assessment-tool.html), cited in Mohiddin, Smith and Phelps, Urban Response Analysis 
Framework.


===== PAGE 142 =====
132    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
3.9 Design and management
This section presents four design and management approaches for complex and fast-
changing environments: adaptive management; collaborating, learning and adapting (CLA); 
action planning; and human-centred design, design thinking and user journeys. This section 
combines design and management because the tools used in design, such as logframes, 
invariably become management tools as well.
This section is closely aligned to the previous sections on assessments and response 
analysis. Without due attention to these prior activities, project design and its eventual 
management is unlikely to succeed. It is also closely associated with the following section on 
monitoring and evaluation (for example where tools such as adaptive management are also 
applicable). It also links to the section on area-based approaches (ABAs), which use some of 
the approaches discussed here. 
3.9.1 Logframes
The logframe analysis tool (and its variants across agencies and donors) remains the 
‘industry standard’ for aid programme design and management. Logframes provide 
a clear project focus (the purpose); clear accountability (the indicators); and a test of 
potential project risks (the assumptions). When used well, logframes can be helpful tools 
for collaborative design (for example organising a stakeholder workshop to formulate a 
jointly owned project). They also build in accountability. However, their use in urban areas 
can be limited for a variety of reasons, including:
•	
As a rigid design and management tool, they can be difficult to amend (especially if 
the logframe has formed part of a contract, as it often does). 
•	
Outputs are usually predetermined, and may take little or no account of project 
iterations or changes in conditions. 
•	
They risk reinforcing a single-sector focus, especially if one sector dominates the 
purpose statement. 
•	
Indicators may measure inputs and not outputs. For example, counting the number 
of houses built does not indicate quality, affordability or appropriateness.
•	
They focus on short-term outputs, with little if any consideration of longer-term 
outcomes or impact.
A detailed critique of project management tools and approaches is provided in A. Obrecht 
with S. Bourne, Making Humanitarian Response More Flexible, ALNAP Background Paper 
(London: ALNAP/ODI, 2018) (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/
ALNAPpaper%20Making%20humanitarian%20response%20more%20flexible_1.pdf).


===== PAGE 143 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    133
In reaction to this, a number of design and management tools that suit urban humanitarian 
settings are being piloted and used. Some of these are described below.
3.9.2 Design and management tools that adapt to changing urban environments 
Previous sections of this review have underscored the complexity of cities, where any 
engagement needs to be flexible, iterative and open-ended, working in areas that are fast-
changing with high degrees of uncertainty and dynamic change. Given logframes have their 
limitations in this area, other urban- and complexity-oriented tools exist. Four of these, 
which have evolved from and/or have application to the uncertainties and complexities of 
urban programming, are presented here. 
1. Adaptive management 
Adaptive management is ‘a programming approach that combines appropriate analysis, 
structured flexibility, and iterative improvements in the face of contextual and causal 
complexity’.112 Work in this area is being undertaken by the International Rescue 
Committee (IRC) and Mercy Corps, which have set up an approach called ADAPT (Analysis 
Driven Agile Programming Techniques) to develop tools that work in complex and fast-
changing environments.   
In recent research across programmes in six locations,113 emerging lessons included the 
need for the following:
•	
Appropriate data and reflective analysis, for example through having many data 
sources and the ability to analyse incoming information, with the time for reflection.
•	
Responsive decision-making and action, linked closely to context analysis and 
assessments, with decisions taken as closely to operational realities as possible.
•	
Dynamic and collaborative teams, building in mentorship and collaborative app-
roaches and hiring people who are adaptable and flexible.
•	
Agile and integrated operations, linking functions such as human resources, finance 
and procurement.
•	
Trusting and flexible partnerships, flexible budgets and flexibility in organisational 
activities.
112	 R. Chambers and B. Ramalingam, Adapting Aid: Lessons from Six Case Studies, IRC and Mercy Corps, 2016 
(https://www.mercycorps.org/sites/default/files/Mercy_Corps_ADAPT_Adapting_aid_report_with_case_
studies.7.21.16.pdf), p. 2.
113	 In Africa, the Middle East and Asia. The studies were not specifically on urban areas, though they do relate to 
complex and dynamic humanitarian situations, hence their relevance to this review. See Chambers and Ramalingam, 
Adapting Aid.


===== PAGE 144 =====
134    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
ALNAP’s work on organisational flexibility114 describes three components of adaptive 
capabilities in humanitarian settings: knowing when to change, including timing and 
motivation; deciding what the change is; and implementing the change through changing/
adapting plans and mobilising resources. Figure 3.12 identifies these three components 
in the context of the project management cycle, referred to in the research as ‘the 
adaptiveness cycle’.
Further useful sources of information on adaptive management include:
114	 A. Obrecht with S. Bourne, Making Humanitarian Response More Flexible, ALNAP Background Paper (London: 
ALNAP/ODI, 2018) (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/ALNAPpaper%20Making%20
humanitarian%20response%20more%20flexible_1.pdf).
Source: A. Obrecht with S. Bourne, Making Humanitarian Response More Flexible, ALNAP Background Paper (London: 
ALNAP/ODI, 2018) (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/ALNAPpaper%20Making%20
humanitarian%20response%20more%20flexible_1.pdf), p. 42.
Figure 3.12 The adaptiveness cycle
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
S
u
pp
ly
 c
h
ai
n 
a
nd
 l
og
is
ti
cs
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Fu
nd
in
g 
    
   
   
    
   
   
   
    
    
    
    
    
   
    
    
   
   
M
o
ni
to
ri
n
g 
a
nd
 e
va
lu
at
io
n 
    
    
    
    
    
   
    
    
   
    
    
   
    
   
Pe
op
le
 a
nd
 s
ki
ll
s
  
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
K
n
o
w
i
n
g
 
w
h
e
n
 
t
o
 
c
h
a
n
g
e
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
I
m
p
l
e
m
e
n
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
c
h
a
n
g
e
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
D
e
c
i
d
i
n
g
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
c
h
a
n
g
e


===== PAGE 145 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    135
The Humanitarian Innovation Guide produced by the Humanitarian Innovations Fund (HIF). 
The guide can be found at https://higuide.elrha.org/.
For examples on the application of adaptive management, see R. Chambers and 
B. Ramalingam, Adapting Aid: Lessons from Six Case Studies, IRC and Mercy Corps, 2016 
(https://www.mercycorps.org/sites/default/files/Mercy_Corps_ADAPT_Adapting_aid_
report_with_case_studies.7.21.16.pdf).
For further discussion on adaptive management throughout the project management cycle, 
see H. Desai, G. Maneo and E. Pellfolk, Managing to Adapt: Analysing Adaptive Management 
for Planning, Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (Oxford: Oxfam, 2018) (www.alnap.org/
help-library/managing-to-adapt-analysingadaptive-management-for-planning-monitoring-
evaluation-and).
2. Collaborating, learning and adapting (CLA)
The collaborating, learning and adapting (CLA) approach provides tools to support 
iterative learning leading to modifications and improvements during the life of a project. 
Three key elements of CLA are:
•	
Connect CLA tools to activities, to track the progress of a project.
•	
Do analysis quickly, to enable adjustments to project activities that may need changing. 
•	
Share information and findings with stakeholders as they emerge. 
Box 3.14  Building in flexibility in human resources and finance 
functions    
Adaptive management, action planning and CLA require flexible internal systems within 
organisations. Research on the use of these approaches in managing area-based programmes 
found three key requirements. The first was that the internal systems of agencies, such as 
human resources (HR) and finance, need to be aligned to the flexible and iterative nature of 
the approach. One way to achieve this is to involve HR and finance staff at the earliest stages 
of the design of an ABA, which can help support services function more smoothly in the 
subsequent implementation of the programme. The second requirement was for HR functions 
to be more flexible: job descriptions may need to be written to be open-ended, which may 
require post-holders to apply skills beyond those in which they may have been formally 
trained. The third requirement was that staff profiles would be closer to a combination of 
social entrepreneur, negotiator and networker, rather than, say, engineer, house-builder or 
logistician (while recognising that technical skills such as these are essential). 
Source: D. Sanderson, ‘Implementing Area-based Approaches (ABAs) in Urban Post-disaster Contexts’, Environment 
and Urbanization 29(2), October 2017 (http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0956247817717422).


===== PAGE 146 =====
136    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
For more information on CLA, see https://researchforevidence.fhi360.org/how-to-successfully-
apply-the-collaborating-learning-and-adapting-cla-approach-in-your-programs.
Building flexibility into programme management is discussed in the example in Box 3.14. 
3. Action planning 
Action planning115 is a project design and management approach that relies on neighbour-
hood-level participation and consensus-building. Its nine characteristics are:
1.	 Problem-based and opportunity-driven, to give clarity on actions to be undertaken.
2.	 Based on achievable actions, to build confidence that recovery can take place.
3.	 Reliant on local knowledge and skills, emphasising local ownership. 
4.	 Non-reliant on complete information, using the principle of ‘optimal ignorance’ to 
avoid the notion that everything needs to be known before anything can happen.
5.	 Small in scale and neighbourhood-based, in order to instill neighbourhood-level 
ownership.
6.	 Embraces serendipity, e.g. chance encounters that lead to the forging of local  
connections.
7.	 Actions are incremental rather than comprehensive – this is particularly important 
given the short funding cycles often associated with post-disaster recovery.
8.	 Starting points rather than end states, reflecting the complexity of urban 
programming, where initially envisaged approaches may not be appropriate as the 
project progresses.
9.	 Visible, tangible outputs, to encourage engagement and replication elsewhere.
An extensive description of tools and approaches to implementing action planning can be 
found in N. Hamdi and R. Goethert, Action Planning for Cities: A Guide to Community Practice 
(Rugby: IT Publications, 1997). 
A database of other process-oriented, people-centred design tools can be found at 
http://www.spatialagency.net/.
115	 N. Hamdi and R. Goethert, Action Planning for Cities: A Guide to Community Practice (Rugby: IT Publications, 1997).


===== PAGE 147 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    137
4. Human-centred design, design thinking and user journeys
Human-centred design116 means collaborating with people in need to design spaces, 
projects and policies that benefit them directly. This approach (which has been around for 
a number of years within the design community) recently gained attention with the first 
‘Design for Humanity Summit’ in 2018, which aimed to inspire humanitarians and designers 
to develop a humanitarian design charter by:
•	
amplifying the discourse on the role of design processes in humanitarian response;
•	
integrating human-centred design processes into the norms of humanitarian action; 
and
•	
building a coalition of humanitarians and designers to launch research and pilot projects.
Human-centred design was used in Regent Park in Toronto, where a 69-acre public space 
is being redeveloped. Designers aimed to improve the lives of residents and 25,000 Syrian 
refugees in the area using a range of collaborative and consultative design processes.117
Design thinking, closely related to human-centred design, is ‘a collaborative tool that mixes 
empathy with systems design to develop more user-friendly human systems’.118 While used in 
the design world for a number of years, with a track record of success, design thinking is little 
known in humanitarian circles.119 Design thinking was recently used in research to rethink 
humanitarian aid, where the aim was to ‘reimagin[e] what a more effective humanitarian 
system would look and act like if we truly “put people at the centre” and designed the system 
from the perspective of its users up and down the humanitarian value chain’.120 
User journeys are a related approach to design thinking which also use empathy as a tool 
for analysis. In a recent study of the use of cash in Kenya,121 the user journeys ‘aim to expose 
116	 For further information, see A. Wells, Design for Humanity Report, 2018 (https://issuu.com/iiha/docs/
design4humanity-report-2018).
117	 R. Smyth, Business of Home Feature: Designers are Collaborating with the UN on Humanitarian Initiatives, 
Institute of Humanitarian Affairs, 2018 (https://medium.com/humanitarianpulse/business-of-home-designers-are-
collaborating-with-the-un-on-humanitarian-initiatives-12b6e9bec867).
118	 C. Bennett et al., Constructive Deconstruction: Imagining Alternative Humanitarian Action (London: ODI, 2018) 
(https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-documents/12206.pdf), p. 1.
119	 See for example T. Brown, Change by Design: How Design Thinking Transforms Organizations and Inspires 
Innovation (New York: HarperCollins, 2009). See also http://designthinking.ideo.com/.
120	 Bennett et al., Constructive Deconstruction, p. 1.
121	 E. Sagmeister and M. Seilern, Kenya Case Study: Improving User Journeys for Humanitarian Cash Transfers (Vienna 
and London: Ground Truth Solutions and ODI, 2018) (http://groundtruthsolutions.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/
User_Journeys_Kenya_Report_2018.pdf).


===== PAGE 148 =====
138    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
the experience of receiving cash transfers from different standpoints. Actively empathising 
with participants enabled the research team to identify unmet and latent needs, as well 
as opportunities for change from the users themselves’. The study also used behaviour 
mapping and a survey of 264 respondents. The resulting data presents individuals’ 
‘journeys’ and their positive and negative experiences of cash delivery mechanisms. This 
information is combined with more traditional statistical analysis and data presentation.
The report is E. Sagmeister and M. Seilern, Kenya Case Study: Improving User Journeys for 
Humanitarian Cash Transfers (Vienna and London: Ground Truth Solutions and ODI, 2018) 
(http://groundtruthsolutions.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/User_Journeys_Kenya_
Report_2018.pdf).
In summary, programme design and management in urban areas needs to be more flexible, 
iterative and adaptable in order to respond meaningfully to fast-changing, complex and 
interlinked environments. The above examples, many of which are relatively new to 
humanitarian aid, provide pointers as to how these approaches may evolve.
3.10 Monitoring and evaluation
In nearly all humanitarian aid programmes, the tasks of ongoing monitoring, programme 
evaluation and learning are vital to success. Monitoring and evaluation activities are particularly 
important in complex urban settings, where initial programme design is likely to require 
modifications and adaptations in response to a rapidly changing operating environment.
The subject of monitoring and evaluation in humanitarian action is vast, and a wealth of 
tools and approaches are available (several are given in this section). This section,122 like 
others, does not intend to review the entirety of monitoring and evaluation, but aims instead 
to highlight key principles, challenges and opportunities relating to urban areas. The section 
introduces some of the challenges in urban monitoring and evaluation, identifies emerging 
lessons and approaches for urban monitoring and evaluation and discusses remote 
monitoring in conflict situations. As with some other sections of this GPR, this is an area of 
emerging rather than established good practice.
Monitoring and evaluation ties in closely to a number of other sections discussed in this 
GPR, especially those within the project management cycle, in particular assessments 
(Section 3.6) and design and management (Section 3.9). 
122	 This section benefited in particular from inputs from Paul Knox Clarke, Amelie Sundberg, Neil Dillon and Leah 
Campbell of the ALNAP Secretariat.


===== PAGE 149 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    139
3.10.1 Challenges in urban monitoring and evaluation  
The complexities of designing and enacting urban programmes are discussed throughout 
this GPR. The process of monitoring and evaluating programme activities and outcomes 
needs to deal with this complexity and the ways in which humanitarians respond to it 
(including by adapting to rapid changes in the environment, engaging with a multitude of 
actors and in some instances undertaking multi-sectoral programming). 
Two reports from ALNAP123 describe some general challenges to monitoring and evaluation 
in humanitarian interventions, which are particularly relevant for urban emergencies:
•	
Identifying what needs to be known in the balance between robustness and speed is 
particularly difficult in cities due to the interconnectedness and density of people and 
services, which often cannot be untangled in a clear way. The monitoring information 
needed is also likely to change as an emergency evolves, but not all organisations are 
accepting of an iterative approach (for a further discussion on tools relating to this, 
see Section 3.9 concerning design and management). 
•	
Considering how to use secondary data rather than resorting to primary data 
collection (which can be time-consuming and costly to collect) is important in urban 
contexts. 
•	
Humanitarian evaluations are often undertaken in periods of severe disruption, 
which can limit access to information and key informants. 
•	
In situations of conflict, it may be difficult for evaluators to access affected commun-
ities, limiting the amount of information available from the users of humanitarian 
goods and services (in urban environments, access may also be a problem even where 
there is no overt conflict – in certain particularly violent parts of a city, for example). 
This is further discussed in the section on remote management below.
•	
Conflicts can also generate sharply differing points of view, which may make it 
difficult to arrive at an objective assessment of a particular issue. To reduce the risk 
of bias, triangulation (basing findings on more than one source) is always necessary.
Several other challenges to evaluation are intensified in urban environments:
•	
Given that cities are dynamic, the humanitarian situation, and humanitarian needs, 
can change very quickly. This means that the objectives and activities of urban 
programmes often change. Monitoring and evaluation systems need to be flexible 
enough to capture these changes, and broad enough to identify unexpected results. 
123	 See A. T. Warner, What is Monitoring in Humanitarian Action? Describing Practice and Identifying Challenges (London: 
ALNAP/ODI, 2017) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/what-is-monitoring-in-humanitarian-action-describing-practice-
and-identifying); and ALNAP, Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Guide (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2016) (https://www.alnap.
org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/alnap-evaluation-humanitarian-action-2016.pdf).


===== PAGE 150 =====
140    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
The density and interconnectedness of services in urban areas means that humani-
tarian needs are generally multi-sectoral and intertwined. For example, disruption 
in electricity generation can lead to water and sanitation systems closing down, with 
knock-on effects on health and education services. Closure of markets can prevent 
people from accessing food, health services or employment – which in turn can make it 
even harder to access food. To understand the humanitarian situation, and to capture 
the effects of humanitarian programmes, monitoring systems and evaluations will 
generally need to be multi-sectoral, and will often need to be multi-agency.
•	
Any specific humanitarian intervention will very often have a number of important 
but indirect effects, which will tend to occur in combination with the effects of other 
interventions. For example, the provision of child-friendly spaces may help improve 
the psychological and physical well-being of children, but it is possible that this 
effect was also a result of better provision of water (so that children or their parents 
did not have to go longer distances in an unsafe environment to collect water). 
Where the chain between cause and effect is long, and where many elements are 
involved, evaluators need to think about how they consider causality: they cannot 
assume that an intervention will lead, in a straight line, to an outcome.
•	
The sheer numbers of people in urban environments mean that deciding who to 
include – and who to leave out – in any form of consultation may be challenging. It 
is also important to remember that communities may not be defined by physical 
boundaries. Communities of practice and interest may also be relevant (see Section 
1.1 on ways of seeing the city for a discussion of communities).
•	
Given the complexity of cities, the learning functions of evaluations – understanding 
what works and why – are particularly important. This challenges evaluations to 
rigorously consider the reasons for success or failure.
•	
The diversity of urban populations means that there will often be multiple interests 
involved in any intervention, making humanitarian activities the focus of much 
political attention. Evaluators should be prepared to navigate the politics of the city.
•	
Potential key informants may be from a wide range of sources, including local and 
national government, journalists, businesspeople and academics. Gatekeepers may 
or may not be apparent, but will almost always be there. Challenges in negotiating 
with gangs, for instance, and seeking access to particular neighbourhoods may be 
exacerbated in urban environments (see Section 1.5 on urban actors).
3.10.2 Emerging lessons and approaches for urban monitoring and evaluation
Lessons and approaches to urban monitoring and evaluation include:


===== PAGE 151 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    141
Build monitoring and evaluation into the programme from the beginning
In urban programmes, it is especially important to include monitoring and evaluation as part 
of the original programme design. Urban programmes tend to be particularly ‘information 
heavy’, as a result of the number and diversity of people and elements involved, and the need 
to capture changes in the context. For programmes to be successful, resources for information 
collection and – particularly – analysis need to be made available at the planning stage. Many 
urban programmes are also fairly small compared to the level of needs across a city. To be 
effective, they often rely on scaling up. This depends on good information on what worked, 
what didn’t and why (see Section 3.2 on area-based approaches for a further discussion of 
scaling up). Several of  the programme design approaches outlined in Section 3.9 combine 
iterative programming with ongoing data collection and analysis. These approaches cannot 
be used successfully without a clear monitoring and evaluation plan.
ALNAP’s Evaluation of Humanitarian Action guide124 outlines key issues that should be 
considered, from the outset, in the design of evaluation systems. These are also broadly 
relevant for thinking about the design of monitoring systems. They include:
•	
The purpose of the evaluation. Is it to show the value of the programme to donors? 
To provide learning for future programmes? To allow for course correction of an 
existing programme? To help with scaling-up an existing programme? The purpose 
of the evaluation will, to a degree, drive the design.
•	
Key users of the evaluation. Who will use it? How can they be engaged in the design to 
ensure that they get the outputs they need?
•	
Focus questions. No evaluation can tell the user everything about an activity or 
programme. A good evaluation will identify the most important questions, and then 
use a methodology that is able to answer those questions.
Focus on specific information needs
Complex, diverse and rapidly changing urban environments create specific information 
needs. Monitoring and evaluation systems need to ensure that these needs are met, and that 
the specificities of urban response are reflected in the design of monitoring and evaluation 
systems. 
Ideally, monitoring should consider ‘need to know versus want to know’ – in such a dense 
environment, where monitoring has to be timely and relevant with scarce resources, 
untangling information needs is critical. Monitoring needs to consider the context – are there 
changes in the situation? Have these led – or are they likely to lead – to changes in need? 
Monitoring also needs to consider the outcomes of activities – what effects (both intended 
124	 ALNAP, Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Guide.


===== PAGE 152 =====
142    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
and, where these can be identified, unintended) are activities having? What does this mean 
for the programme?
Evaluations need to focus on a number of issues:
•	
Causal factors: the reasons for the relative success or failure of an intervention – 
either to allow for adaptive programming, or for extending or scaling up pilot 
programmes.
•	
Tailoring to context: the degree to which approaches were appropriate to the 
urban context – potentially against the benchmark of best practice guidelines for 
working in cities.
•	
Interconnectedness: the extent to which the programme took account of the 
interconnectedness of urban response, both in terms of interactions with other 
actors and the potential unintended spill-over effects of programme activities in 
other areas.
•	
Dynamic programming: the rationale for programme adaptations and changes 
away from initial programme objectives and the quality of the decision-making 
that led to those changes.
For further information, see:
I. Christoplos and N. Dillon with F. Bonino, Evaluation of Protection in Humanitarian Action 
(London: ALNAP/ODI, 2018) (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/
main/EPHA%20Guide%20online%20interactive.pdf).
S. Jabeen, ‘Unintended Outcomes Evaluation Approach: A Plausible Way to Evaluate 
Unintended Outcomes of Social Development Outcomes’, Eval Program Plann 68, June 2018 
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28965770).
J. Puri et al., What Methods May Be Used in Impact Evaluations of Humanitarian Assistance?, 
Working Paper 22 (New Delhi: International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie), 2015) 
(https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/wp-22-humanitarian-
methods-working-paper-top.pdf).
Engage in complexity and systems thinking
Overall, urban monitoring and evaluation means engaging in complexity and systems thinking 
(see Section 1.1, on ways of seeing the city). Three guides that outline steps for undertaking 
evaluations in complex settings or using a systems-based approach to evaluation are:


===== PAGE 153 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    143
J. M. Bamberger, J. L. Vaessen and E. R. Raimondo (eds), Dealing with Complexity in 
Development Evaluation (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2015).
M. B. Hargreaves, Evaluating System Change: A Planning Guide (Princeton, NJ: Mathematica 
Policy Research, 2010) (https://www.mathematica-mpr.com/our-publications-and-findings/
publications/evaluating-system-change-a-planning-guide).
B. Williams and R. Hummelbrunner, Systems Concepts in Action: A Practitioner’s Toolkit 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010) (https://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=18331).
P. J. Rogers, ‘Using Program Theory to Evaluate Complicated and Complex 
Aspects of Interventions’, Evaluation 14, 2008 (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/ 
10.1177/1356389007084674).
This USAID paper considers issues specific to monitoring in situations of complexity: 
Discussion Note: Complexity-Aware Monitoring, July 2018 (https://usaidlearninglab.org/sites/
default/files/resource/files/cleared_dn_complexity-aware_monitoring.pdf).
Box 3.15 Using indicators in monitoring a multi-sectoral programme 
in Guatemala City  
In Barrio Mio, an area-based disaster risk reduction and response project in Guatemala 
City, Project Concern International (PCI) implemented a multi-sectoral programme with 
activities ranging from women’s savings groups to the installation of retaining walls and 
water tanks and building the GIS capacities of municipal actors. Initially, the project relied 
on a set of indicators from its funding proposal. These were separated by sector, and 
covered issues such as the number of shelters incorporating hazard mitigation measures 
and the number of people demonstrating good handwashing practices. 
A case study on the project found that, while these indicators helped to demonstrate 
achieved deliverables, they failed to ‘capture the richness of the Barrio Mio project 
and what it’s been able to achieve – which is far beyond the level of ambition that 
these indicators suggest’. The Barrio Mio team developed a number of complementary 
indicators in addition to the additional list from the donor, though tensions remained 
‘between what some describe as a “myopic” focus on the list of indicators and the overall 
impact the project has had’.
Adapted from Campbell (forthcoming, 2019).


===== PAGE 154 =====
144    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Be aware of the multiple information sources available in the city
Cities are information-rich. Local government, service providers, chambers of commerce, 
journalists and many others may collect the information that monitoring or evaluation 
systems require. It may also be possible to make use of geospatial approaches (see Section 
3.4 on mapping and geospatial analysis) to identify, or triangulate, changes in context or 
the effects of programmes. When using secondary data, however, it is important to ensure 
that the data adequately represents the populations of greatest concern. Official data often 
ignores certain parts of cities (such as informal settlements), or is aggregated at a high level, 
and so effectively hides the reality of life for the poorest or most marginalised groups.
When investigating the degree to which outcomes are achieved, or the constraints to 
achieving them, qualitative data is also important. One literature review on urban crises 
advises that ‘qualitative data may be required to capture impacts and outcomes that are 
more difficult to quantify (e.g. impacts on local power structures and urban socio-economic 
realities)’.125 Qualitative approaches are critical to explaining how and why something 
occurs.126 A 2016 learning workshop of urban disaster risk reduction practitioners empha-
sised the need for monitoring and evaluation tools to recognise the complex social dynamics 
in urban neighbourhoods, and use qualitative indicators to understand the context.127
For further information, see:
M. Skovdal and F. Cornish, Qualitative Research for Development: A Guide for Practitioners 
(Rugby: Practical Action, 2015) (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/64207/).
M. Quinn Patton and M. Cochran, ‘A Guide to Using Qualitative Research Methodology’, MSF, 
2012 (https://evaluation.msf.org/sites/evaluation/files/a_guide_to_using_qualitative_research_
methodology.pdf).
ICRC, Acquiring and Analysing Data in Support of Evidence-based Decision Making (Geneva: 
ICRC, 2017) (https://www.icrc.org/en/publication/acquiring-and-analysing-data-support-
evidence-based-decisions-guide-humanitarian-work).
M. Bamberger, J. Rugh and L. Mabry, ‘Qualitative Evaluation Approaches’ in RealWorld 
Evaluation: Working under Budget, Time, Data, and Political Constraints (Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publications, 2012).
125	 D. Brown et al., Urban Crises and Humanitarian Responses: A Literature Review (London: UCL, 2015) 
(https://www.urban-response.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/bartlett.pdf).
126	 M. Skovdal and F. Cornish, Qualitative Research for Development: A Guide for Practitioners (Rugby: Practical Action, 
2015) (http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/64207/).
127	 J. P. Sarmiento et al. (eds), Urban Disaster Risk: Systematization of Neighborhood Practices (Miami, FL: Florida 
International University Extreme Events Institute, 2016).


===== PAGE 155 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    145
M. Q. Patton, Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 2002).
Use people-centred approaches
As discussed throughout this Good Practice Review (and introduced in Section 1.1 on ways 
of seeing the city), people-centred approaches are key. One guide presents an approach 
which asks households to (retrospectively) describe their livelihoods before the disaster, 
immediately after the disaster and after humanitarian interventions; identify changes; and 
describe the contribution interventions have made to these changes. It also lays out good 
practice in working with affected communities. See R. Few et al., Contribution 
to Change: An Approach to Evaluating the Role of Intervention in Disaster Recovery (Rugby: 
Practical Action Publishing, 2013) (https://reliefweb.int/report/world/contribution-change-
approach-evaluating-role-intervention-disaster-recovery).
Similarly, the Good Enough Guide to Impact Measurement and Accountability in Emergencies 
provides a number of simple and effective tools and principles for understanding the impact 
of humanitarian activities from the perspective of the people who are meant to benefit from 
them: see https://www.alnap.org/help-library/good-enough-guide-impact-measurement-
and-accountability-in-emergencies.
The ‘most significant change’ (MSC) approach relies on collecting significant change stories 
coming out of a programme, and the systematic selection of the most significant stories 
by panels of designated stakeholders or staff. It is particularly good at identifying the 
more unusual or extreme effects of interventions, and for creating a shared understanding 
between stakeholder groups involved in a response. See R. Davies and J. Dart, The ‘Most 
Significant Change’ (MSC) Technique: A Guide to Its Use, 2005 (https://www.mande.co.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2005/MSCGuide.pdf).
In addition, a number of toolkits and guidance notes are available to support participatory 
approaches to information collection and analysis. They include:  
•	
IFRC’s VCA Toolbox (http://www.ifrc.org/Global/Publications/disasters/vca/vca-
toolbox-en.pdf)
•	
Tools and methods for undertaking PRA (also called RRA) in urban areas 
(https://www.iied.org/rra-notes-21-participatory-tools-methods-urban-areas).
•	
Participatory urban planning approaches (https://participatoryplanning.ca/sites/
default/files/upload/document/participatory_urban_planning_brochure_2016.
pdf).


===== PAGE 156 =====
146    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Consider working ‘backwards’, from outcomes to interventions
An important element of many people-centred approaches to evaluation is that they invert 
the ‘normal’ sequence of evaluation. Rather than starting with an intervention and working 
forwards to try to identify the results of the intervention, they begin with the changes that 
people have seen and work backwards to see how these changes link to the intervention. As 
a result, they are generally better adapted to evaluating urban programmes, where there 
are often long and complicated causal chains between the humanitarian response and the 
effects on people’s lives, and where multiple interventions may have contributed to the final 
outcome. That said, they may be less good at fulfilling donor requirements to show how a 
single, specific intervention worked. Some of these approaches may also be too demanding 
for certain types of humanitarian crises, such as rapid-onset emergencies. 
The Good Enough Guide, MSC and Contribution to Change discussed above all take this 
approach, as does the increasingly popular ‘outcome harvesting’ method, which uses a six-
step process to identify positive and negative, intended and unintended outcomes, and then 
articulates verifiable connections between these outcomes and initiatives of interest: see 
https://www.outcomemapping.ca/download/wilsongrau_en_Outome%20Harvesting%20
Brief_revised%20Nov%202013.pdf.
Traditional approaches for evaluating urban interventions can still be relevant and 
appropriate. The ALNAP evaluation guide presents different evaluative options, such as 
project evaluation, process evaluation and impact evaluation and accompanying methods, 
including case studies, process reviews, outcome reviews, before and after comparisons, 
interrupted time series and comparison groups.128 
Evaluation is not the only way to promote organisational learning, nor is it necessarily 
the most cost-effective. Formal EHA sits alongside a range of additional learning and 
accountability tools, from beneficiary tracking to monitoring systems and After-Action 
Reviews. Other learning processes to consider in humanitarian action are also presented in 
the ALNAP guide.   
Consider using iterative approaches 
As noted throughout this GPR, cities are dynamic environments, where needs often change 
quickly. For this reason, many approaches to monitoring and evaluation emphasise an 
ongoing, iterative process that relies less on establishing whether pre-defined indicators 
are being achieved and more on understanding what is changing, and how (and whether) 
the humanitarian response is achieving these changes. 
128	 ALNAP, Evaluation of Humanitarian Action Guide, pp. 193–214.


===== PAGE 157 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    147
Box 3.16 Iterative monitoring and evaluation of the 2010 Haiti 
earthquake 
Following the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, Groupe URD conducted a number of iterative130  
and real-time evaluations. Iterative evaluation aims to ‘analyse how a programme is 
being implemented in relation to changes in context and needs, and to ensure that the 
programme remains relevant and that there is effective coordination between the actors 
involved’. From 2012–15, Groupe URD maintained a ‘Haiti observatory’ to conduct iterative 
monitoring, promoting learning and good practice.
	
More information about the work of the Haiti observatory can be found at https://www.urd.org/en/field-offices/Our-
activities-in-Haiti/.
130  See https://www.urd.org/en/field-offices/Our-activities-in-Haiti/What-we-do/Evaluation,130/Iterative-
evaluation-of-the and https://www.urd.org/en/field-offices/Our-activities-in-Haiti/What-we-do/Evaluation,130/
Evaluation-of-the-Support,1416.  
Examples of this type of iterative approach include:
•	
Outcome mapping: a tool for planning, monitoring and evaluating interventions 
that focuses on the changes in behaviour that these interventions are intended 
to achieve, rather than hard outputs such as better shelter units or availability 
of water. It is designed to be cyclical, with monitoring and evaluation activities 
feeding into (re)designs of the programme. More information is available at 
https://www.outcomemapping.ca/download/OM_English_final.pdf.
•	
Real-time evaluations: participatory evaluations that aim to identify bottlenecks and 
problems in a response, to allow for immediate course corrections and changes to 
programming. See https://www.alnap.org/help-library/real-time-evaluations-of-
humanitarian-action-an-alnap-guide. See also http://journals.sfu.ca/jmde/index.
php/jmde_1/article/view/380.
•	
The Collaborating, Learning and Adapting approach (CLA): another monitoring 
approach that is specifically designed to support adaptive programming (see 
Section 3.9 on design and management). A brief introduction can be found at 
https://usaidlearninglab.org/node/14633.
The Good Enough Guide and MSC approaches outlined above are both intended to be used 
iteratively.


===== PAGE 158 =====
148    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
It is worth noting that simply having an iterative approach is not enough: effective 
monitoring and evaluation of urban humanitarian action requires not only that monitoring 
and evaluation systems are in place, but also that they are linked to the relevant decision-
making procedures and systems. Early engagement with key users (see above) can go 
some way to addressing this problem. For more suggestions on ensuring that evaluative 
(and, by extension, monitoring) information is used, see A. Hallam and F. Bonino, Using 
Evaluation for a Change: Insights from Humanitarian Practitioners (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2013) 
(https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/alnap-study-using-
evaluation-for-a-change.pdf).
Work collaboratively with other stakeholders 
Another common feature of many monitoring and evaluation approaches suited to 
urban environments is that they are intended to be used by multiple stakeholders, 
including humanitarian agencies, local government and civil society. In fact, many aim to 
simultaneously produce information and build shared understanding of the context and a 
shared commitment to response activities.
Shared or joint approaches have important advantages in urban contexts, where, in the 
wake of a humanitarian crisis, many organisations will be working on response activities 
that will influence (and hopefully support) each other. Joint monitoring and evaluation 
could facilitate an understanding broader than any one project, and ‘may provide better 
opportunities to document challenges, shortcomings, failures and successes’, as well as 
potentially revealing systemic issues, rather than individual cases.130
It should be noted that collaboration can often be difficult, particularly where the agencies 
involved are competing for funding or where they have very different organisational structures 
and cultures. See Section 2.1 on coordination for further discussion on this. See also T. Beck 
and M. Buchanan-Smith, Joint Evaluations Coming of Age? The Quality and Future Scope of Joint 
Evaluations (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2008) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/joint-evaluations-
coming-of-age-the-quality-and-future-scope-of-joint-evaluations). The UN Evaluation Group’s 
Resource Pack on Joint Evaluations (2014) may also be helpful: http://www.unevaluation.org/
document/detail/1620.
3.10.3 Remote monitoring in conflict situations
Monitoring in conflict situations is inevitably governed by access and security concerns. In 
cases where access by international humanitarian actors is restricted, remote monitoring may 
take place. In contexts where access is severely limited, remote monitoring, as a wider part of
130	 Brown et al., Urban Crises and Humanitarian Responses.
remote management, may be the only option. Remote management can be defined as:


===== PAGE 159 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    149
A reactive stance in response to insecurity that involves some delegation of authority and 
decision-making responsibility to national implementers. There is commonly a moderate 
investment in capacity building for nationals and procedures in place that enable better 
communication, monitoring, and quality. Assumes that decision-making and authority 
will revert back to international [staff] following the restoration of security.131
A 2017 literature review of humanitarian programming and monitoring in inaccessible 
conflict settings132 noted that ‘remote operations require increased monitoring and reporting 
requirements than traditional programming due to the lack of field presence and direct 
oversight by international organizations, but often have fewer resources to meet these 
increased demands’. Challenges include ‘limited opportunities for data collection, poor 
quality data and inaccurate information, and lack of monitoring skills and capacity of local 
staff, among others’.    
An important issue here concerns risk transfer to local staff and other local actors. 
Concerning this, the same literature review concluded that ‘Remote operations involve the 
transfer of risk from international to local actors, who are assumed to be at lower risk for 
targeting and therefore safer when implementing. This is often a false assumption as they 
face unique threats that are often not acknowledged in security assessments. Additionally, 
local actors are infrequently present at trainings on security, and are often left with minimal 
security-related equipment when expatriates evacuate’.133
Where access is impossible, such as in conflict situations, existing data and resources are 
sometimes used. For example, FAO and WFP used government data for their 2018 monitoring 
report on food security in 16 conflict-affected countries.134
For more discussion on remote monitoring, see:
Workshop Summary: Remote Monitoring, Evaluation and Accountability in the Syria Response, 
ALNAP and DEC, 27 June 2014 (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/
main/alnap-dec-syria-workshop-summary-final.pdf).
131	 S. Choudhri, K. Cordes and N. Miller, Humanitarian Programming and Monitoring in Inaccessible Conflict Situations: A 
Literature Review, Health Cluster, 2017 (https://www.who.int/health-cluster/resources/publications/remote-lit-review.pdf).
132	 Ibid.
133	 Ibid., p. 8.
134	 FAO and WFP, Monitoring Food Security in Countries with Conflict Situations: A Joint FAO/WFP Update for the United 
Nations Security Council, January 2018, Issue 3 (http://www.fao.org/3/I8386EN/i8386en.pdf), p. iii.


===== PAGE 160 =====
150    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Box 3.17 Libya Joint Market Monitoring Initiative (JMMI)  
The Joint Market Monitoring Initiative (JMMI) was established in 2017 by REACH and the 
Libya Cash and Markets Working Group (CWG) to monitor market dynamics in order to 
improve cash programming. REACH describes the methodology for data collection as 
follows: ‘The methodology for the JMMI is based on purposive sampling. In each assessed 
market, at least four prices per item need to be collected from different shops to ensure 
the quality and consistency of collected data. 
‘Partner field teams, in coordination with the CWG, identify shops to assess based on the 
following criteria: 1. Shops need to be large enough to sell all or most assessed items. 2. 
Prices in these shops need to be good indicators of the general price levels in the assessed 
area. 3. Shops should be located in different areas within the assessed city or baladiya. 
‘In locations where it is not possible to identify four large markets that fulfil criterion (1), 
smaller shops, such as grocery shops, vegetable vendors, butchers and bakeries, are 
added to the shop list, as long as they fit criteria (2) and (3), in order to guarantee at least 
four prices per item of interest. Each month, price data is collected from the same shops 
whenever possible to ensure comparability across months. 
‘The CWG primarily targets urban areas throughout Libya, aiming to ensure coverage of 
markets that serve as commercial hubs for surrounding regions. Data is collected via the 
KoBo mobile data collection application. The CWG maintains a joint KoBo136 account for 
the JMMI. The data collection tool is published alongside the dataset every month and 
disseminated to the humanitarian community’.
Monitoring takes place monthly of a ‘minimum expenditure basket’, comprising both food 
and non-food items. REACH reports that ‘By following the price developments of products 
such as bread, beans, soap and fuel, REACH and the CWG have been able to provide 
humanitarian actors [with] information on the financial burdens faced by households 
dependent on market priced goods in their respective localities’. The information indicates 
variations between cities and regions, wherein ‘the assessment noted clear spatial 
patterns both in May and June [2018] with basket costs generally lowest in coastal port 
cities and highest in southern Libya’.
Source: REACH, Libya: What Does It Take to Make Ends Meet: Understanding Financial Burdens with the Aid of the 
Minimum Expenditure Basket (Geneva: REACH, 2018) (https://reliefweb.int/report/libya/libya-joint-market-
monitoring-initiative-jmmi-1-10-october-2018).
136  See https://www.urd.org/en/field-offices/Our-activities-in-Haiti/What-we-do/Evaluation,130/Iterative-evaluation-
of-the and https://www.urd.org/en/field-offices/Our-activities-in-Haiti/What-we-do/Evaluation,130/Evaluation-of-the-
Support,1416. 


===== PAGE 161 =====
Chapter 3
Tools and approaches    |    151
E. Sagmeister and J. Steets, The Use of Third-party Monitoring in Insecure Contexts: Lessons from 
Afghanistan, Somalia and Syria, SAVE Resource Paper, October 2016 (https://www.gppi.net/
media/SAVE__2016__The_use_of_third-party_monitoring_in_insecure_contexts.pdf).
B. Norman, Monitoring and Accountability Practices for Remotely Managed Projects 
Implemented in Volatile Operating Environments, Tearfund, 2012 (https://www.elrha.org/
wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Remote20Monitoring20and20Accountability20Practice20_
web2028229.pdf).


===== PAGE 162 =====
152    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts


===== PAGE 163 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    153
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses
4.1 Housing, land and property (HLP) rights
Engaging in housing, land and property (HLP) rights is vital for effective post-disaster recovery 
efforts and providing assistance to people caught up in long-term displacement situations. HLP 
can be a complex area to work in and act upon in urban areas (not least given the large number 
of forms of tenure arrangements) – but failure to engage can lead to wasted aid investments, 
increase affected people’s vulnerability and generate conflict over contested land.
This section1 defines HLP and identifies some of the challenges that complex HLP can bring 
to urban humanitarian response. It identifies challenges in HLP programming. It discusses 
addressing HLP issues in shelter programmes. 
HLP rights are a vital part of shelter and settlements programming, and so this section links 
closely to Section 4.2 on shelter and settlements. It also links closely to protection (HLP falls 
within the Global Protection Cluster, and is further discussed in Section 4.7), area-based 
approaches (Section 3.2), WASH (for example in accessing services; see Section 4.4), conflict 
(Section 1.2.1) and violence (Section 1.2.2).
4.1.1 Defining HLP
HLP rights are about ‘having a home, free from the fear of forced eviction; a place that offers 
shelter, safety, and the ability to secure a livelihood. HLP rights are referenced and defined 
in several international human rights instruments, and organisations providing protection 
and assistance to persons affected by crisis should respect the human rights, including HLP 
rights, of affected persons at all times, and advocate for their promotion and protection to 
the fullest extent’.2
Key to HLP is tenure, defined by the Global Shelter Cluster as ‘the relationship among people, 
as groups or individuals, with respect to housing and land, established through statutory 
law or customary, informal or religious arrangements’.3 Within this are many forms of urban 
tenure arrangements, including private ownership, leasehold, cooperative housing, rental 
1	
This section benefited in particular from inputs by Leah Campbell of ALNAP.
2	
NRC, Security of Tenure in Urban Areas: Guidance Note for Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) 
(http://pubs.iied.org/10827IIED).
3	
Shelter Cluster, Land Rights and Shelter: The Due Diligence Standard, 2013 (www.sheltercluster.org/resources/
documents/due-diligence-shelter-a4), cited in NRC, Security of Tenure in Urban Areas.


===== PAGE 164 =====
154    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
accommodation (on both formal and informal land) and living in informal settlements. Land 
ownership types include statutory, customary, religious or hybrid arrangements (see Table 
4.1 for examples). 
An important element is the distinction between tenure that is de jure (how things should 
happen according to the law) and de facto (how they happen in reality). This is particularly 
important in relation to informal settlements (which by law should not be there, but which 
account for the tenure arrangements of hundreds of millions of people).
4.1.2 HLP in urban areas
HLP is particularly complex in urban areas, for a number of reasons. Cities have a wide 
range of different living arrangements, from single-family occupancy to multiple occupancy, 
such as in a high-rise tenement. Multi-occupancy buildings may comprise both owners and 
renters. In some instances people may share rooms in shifts. People who rent property may 
do so under different forms of agreement with the landlord (see Table 4.1).
Another complexity relates to informal settlements, i.e. people living on land with precarious 
ownership arrangements who may have no formal documentation of ownership. Research 
by IDMC4 notes the following points about HLP rights and urban informal settlements:
•	
‘Urban informal settlers are particularly vulnerable to disasters and represent a 
significant proportion of those displaced
•	
‘Housing assistance tends to be based on ownership criteria rather than needs, which 
excludes many urban informal settlers who are mostly tenants or squatters
•	
‘The complex and unclear tenure situation in informal settlements, combined with 
weak urban governance, hinders the provision of housing assistance. As a result, a 
disproportionate amount of international resources are dedicated to temporary 
shelter rather than long-term interventions
•	
‘Housing responses for urban informal settlers displaced by disasters require 
consistency and continuity between humanitarian and development assistance to 
address beneficiaries’ immediate needs as well as their underlying vulnerability to 
future disaster and displacement.’
The IFRC notes, following the Pisco earthquake in Peru in 2007, 78% of landowners received 
grants for reconstruction, while tenants and informal settlers were generally excluded.5 
4   B. McCallin and I. Scherer, Urban Informal Settlers Displaced by Disasters: Challenges to Housing Responses 
(Geneva: IDMC, 2015) (http://www.internal-displacement.org/publications/urban-informal-settlers-displaced-by-
disasters-challenges-to-housing-responses).
5   IFRC,  World  Disasters  Report  2010:  Focus  on Urban Risk (Geneva: IFRC, 2010).


===== PAGE 165 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    155
In displacement situations, refugees and IDPs are at high risk of tenure insecurity, given 
that many will have limited choices about where to live, and will often have little option 
but to live in informal settlements or in places with little or no formal rental agreements. 
Research by NRC6 on women’s HLP rights in six countries (Afghanistan, Ecuador, Lebanon, 
Liberia, Palestine and South Sudan) found that the rights of women ‘are often neglected in 
humanitarian response’. HLP vulnerability is highly gendered. According to UN Habitat, ‘less 
than 2% of women’s land and property rights are registered worldwide’.7 NRC’s research 
found that inheritance and marital property laws can protect women’s HLP, that ‘there is a 
need to recognise the significance of religious and customary structures’ and that existing 
discrimination is often worsened during displacement. UN Habitat explains that ‘After 
disaster or conflict, women-headed households – whose land rights are secured through 
male relatives – may become vulnerable to a loss of land and access to livelihoods’.8
See NRC, Life Can Change: Securing Housing, Land and Property Rights for Displaced Women (Oslo: 
NRC, 2012) (http://womenshlp.nrc.no/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/GlobalReportWHLP.pdf).
Disputes over land rights can fuel conflict and discrimination. Regarding IDPs in Mogadishu, 
IDMC notes that ‘land and property disputes are at the heart of the urban conflict’.9 The 
report notes that ‘Common housing, land and property (HLP) challenges include the 
unlawful appropriation and attribution of public land titles by government officials and 
private owners, inheritance disputes and claims over land and property by returning IDPs, 
refugees and migrants’.10 The report also notes that ‘An estimated 80 per cent of court 
cases heard in Mogadishu’s supreme court are related to land’.11 Crises can also be an 
opportunistic moment for illegal or unjust land acquisition, which can sometimes include 
overt violence and carefully planned legislative measures.12 
Finally, crises can also lead to a loss of documentation such as personal identification. 
One report on providing access to identification for refugees in Jordan states that 
6   NRC, Life Can Change: Securing Housing, Land and Property Rights for Displaced Women (Oslo: NRC, 2012) 
(http://womenshlp.nrc.no/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/GlobalReportWHLP.pdf).
7  ‘Land and Property: UN-Habitat in Disaster and Conflict Contexts’, undated (http://mirror.unhabitat.org/pmss/
listItemDetails.aspx?publicationID=3192).
8   Ibid.
9   IDMC, City of Flight: New and Secondary Displacements in Mogadishu, Somalia (Geneva: IDMC, 2018) 
(http://www.internal-displacement.org/sites/default/files/inline-files/201811-urban-displacement-mogadishu.pdf), p. 7.
10   Ibid.
11   Ibid., p. 8.
12   D. Brown et al., Urban Crises and Humanitarian Responses: A Literature Review (London: UCL, 2015) 
(https://www.urban-response.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/bartlett.pdf).


===== PAGE 166 =====
156    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
‘In humanitarian crises, the absence of identity documents can create a multitude of 
administrative dead ends for refugees: reducing their ability to register with authorities 
and/or humanitarian organisations, limiting their freedom of movement, preventing them 
from accessing formal employment or education, and making it difficult or impossible to 
access a wide range of humanitarian services’.13 In Haiti, many humanitarian organisations 
were ill-equipped to deal with the complications of issuing identification to displaced 
earthquake survivors.14 
Records relating to land ownership, housing and property may also have been lost or 
destroyed. ‘In post-disaster situations, particularly following conflict, legal frameworks 
can collapse altogether, making the task of verifying the legal status of land and property 
ownership especially difficult, as was the case in Kosovo.’15 Combined with damage to their 
residence, the absence of HLP documentation may prevent displaced people from returning 
to their place of origin. 
For further discussion of these issues, see A. de Waal, ‘Why Humanitarian Organizations 
Need to Tackle Land Issues’, in S. Pantuliano (ed.), Uncharted Territory: Land, Conflict and 
Humanitarian Action (Rugby: Practical Action, 2009) (https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/
files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/5559.pdf).
See also M. Lombard, Land Tenure and Urban Conflict: A Review of the Literature, Global 
Urban Research Centre Working Paper 8 (Manchester: Manchester University, 2012) 
(http://hummedia.manchester.ac.uk/institutes/mui/gurg/working_papers/GURC_
wp8_000.pdf).
4.1.3 Challenges in HLP programming16
HLP challenges cannot usually be addressed by short-term responses. However, short-term 
actions can make a lasting impact on HLP for affected populations. Key challenges include 
the following:
13   M. Wilson and J. Casswell, Recognising Urban Refugees in Jordan: Opportunities for Mobile-enabled Identity Solutions 
(London: GSMA, 2018) (https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Recognising_
urban_refugees_in_Jordan.pdf).
14   Response to the Humanitarian Crisis in Haiti following the 12 January 2010 Earthquake: Achievements, Challenges and 
Lessons to be Learned, IASC, 2010 (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/response-to-the-humanitarian-crisis-In-haiti-
following-the-12-january-2010-earthquake-0).
15   D. Brown et al., Urban Crises and Humanitarian Responses: A Literature Review (London: UCL, 2015) 
(https://www.urban-response.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/bartlett.pdf).
16	  This section draws in particular on NRC, Security of Tenure in Urban Areas. 


===== PAGE 167 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    157
Ignoring HLP issues can do harm
There are a number of ways in which humanitarian responses can affect HLP rights. For 
example, assistance to repair homes or resume livelihoods activities can cause tensions if 
there are competing rights and claims.17 Use of land for humanitarian activities (such as the 
provision of services in temporary camps, use of space to store stock and the construction 
of critical infrastructure) can all have ‘unintended and negative impacts for the population 
such as forced evictions and forced relocation, notably for unregistered tenants and families 
living in informal settlements’.18
Post-disaster recovery efforts that ignore tenure can also have negative consequences, 
including agencies being sued by absentee landowners when they discover housing has been 
built on their land without their consent. Failure to consider tenure can also lead to forced 
evictions of people who have been assisted. In addition, ‘The threat of unexploded ordnance 
in urban and peri-urban areas creates risks for HLP rights. Ordnance clearance and release of 
land, houses and properties may be used to legitimize secondary occupation or exacerbate 
pre-crisis disputes’.19 See Section 4.3 on debris and waste management.
HLP issues can be long-term, systemic problems 
After a sudden-onset or displacement crisis, urban residents may be rendered homeless, ending 
up in spontaneous camps (set up by people themselves) or planned camps (set up by agencies). 
People may live for months or years (for example in Port-au-Prince after the earthquake in 
Haiti) with no formal tenure arrangements, and be subject to removal at any time. 
People displaced into cities often find themselves living among poorer residents who 
themselves face HLP challenges, ranging from exploitative/conflictual relationships with 
landlords to insecure land tenure. In Tripoli in Lebanon, some of the most vulnerable 
settlements are considered illegal by municipal authorities. 
For more on HLP issues and Syrian refugees in Lebanon, see UN Habitat and UNHCR, 
Housing, Land and Property Issues of Syrian Refugees in Lebanon from Homs City, 2018 
(https://unhabitat.org/books/housing-land-and-property-issues-of-syrian-refugees-in-
lebanon-from-homs-city-november-2018/).
17	  Global Protection Cluster, Emergency Response to Housing Land and Property Issues in Syria, 2013 
(https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Emergency%20response%20to%20Housing%20Land%20
and%20Property%20issues%20in%20Syria.pdf).
18	  Ibid. See also S. Levine, S. Bailey and B. Boyer, Avoiding Reality: Land, Institutions and Humanitarian Action in Post-
earthquake Haiti (London: ODI, 2012) (www.odi.org/publications/6979-avoiding-reality-land-institutions-and-
humanitarian-action-post-earthquake-haiti).
19	  Global Protection Cluster, Emergency Response to Housing Land and Property Issues in Syria.


===== PAGE 168 =====
158    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
The degree of tenure can be an indicator of vulnerability
Wider vulnerability and the level of tenure are often linked: those with greater insecurity – 
such as IDPs, refugees and poorer urban dwellers – are almost always more vulnerable.20 
Table 4.1 identifies different tenure categories and associated rights. The first six of the nine 
types of tenure identified relate to the informal sector. 
20	  NRC, Technical Guidelines for Identifying and Addressing HLP Issues in Informal Settlements/Camps and Collective 
Centres in Northern Syria (Oslo: NRC, 2017).
Form of tenure
Meaning
Level of rights
Street/pavement 
dweller
Squatter or informal settler
No rights (no protection against 
forced eviction) 
Squatter tenant 
(partial possession)
Squatter or informal settler renting 
a plot/land with some degree of 
protection (e.g. may be administrative, 
such as access to utilities)
or
 Squatter ‘owner’
Squatter or informal settler with 
some degree of protection (e.g. may 
be administrative, such as access 
to utilities).
Limited rights against eviction 
if there is a temporary form of 
protection
Tenant in 
unauthorised 
subdivision
Tenant without legal protection 
with regard to zoning or land use
No rights (no protection against 
forced eviction) if the site is 
unsuitable for development
Owner in 
unauthorised 
subdivision
Owner without legal protection 
with regard to zoning or land use
or
Limited rights against eviction if 
the site is eligible for upgrading
Legal owner in 
unauthorised 
construction
Owner with legal protection with 
regard to zoning or land use, but 
without construction permit
Limited rights to use
Tenant with 
contract
Tenant with legal protection and 
temporary contract (may be formal 
or informal contract), including 
approved zoning and construction
Leaseholder with 
contract 
Long-term leaseholder with 
renewable and registered contract, 
including approved zoning and 
construction
Access to full set of rights
Freeholder
Legal owner, including approved 
zoning and construction
Table 4.1 Gradation of tenure options
Source: A. Durand-Lasserve and H. Selod, ‘Urban Land Markets: Improving Land Management for Successful 
Urbanization’ in S. V. Lall et al. (eds), The Formalization of Urban Land Tenure in Developing Countries (Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2009) (https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-1-4020-8862-9_5#page-1).


===== PAGE 169 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    159
For further discussion on land tenure types and their relationship to internal displacement, 
see J. Kiggundu, Why Land Tenure Matters for IDPs: Lessons from Sub-Saharan Africa (Washington 
DC: Brookings, 2008) (https://www.brookings.edu/on-the-record/why-land-tenure-matters-for-
idps-lessons-from-sub-saharan-africa/).
See also G Payne et al., Land Tenure in Urban Environments, USAID Issue Brief, (Washington 
DC: USAID, 2014) (https://www.land-links.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/USAID_Land_
Tenure_Urban_Brief_061214-1.pdf).
For an example of an initiative to address land rights and informality in Freetown, 
Sierra Leone, see Development Action Group, Sierra Leone Urban Research Centre Pro-
poor Land Rights and Informality (Freetown: SLURC, 2018) (https://www.slurc.org/
uploads/1/0/9/7/109761391/final_dag_report.pdf).
Box 4.1  Due diligence requirements in camp settings, northern Syria  
In northern Syria, NRC produced guidance for working in informal settlements and 
collective centres, emphasising that ‘Whether they are working in new or existing 
informal settlements/camps or collective centres, humanitarian actors have a duty to 
establish who the owner of the land/property on/in which their intervention will be 
conducted is and to secure their agreement before commencing activities’.
‘Due diligence requirements include:
•	
‘Conduct a stakeholder analysis, which should be updated on a regular basis, to gain 
and maintain an understanding of stakeholders’ roles in managing and influencing 
HLP issues.
•	
‘Ensure that you are dealing with the real owner of the land/property prior to 
intervention. There may be more than one owner, in which case humanitarian actors 
need to ensure they are dealing with all.
•	
‘Beware fraudulent claims, i.e. people claiming land they do not own for recompense.
•	
‘Use of Collective Centres – Collective Centres include public and private buildings 
that are used to offer temporary shelter to IDPs. At some stage the community is likely 
to want to use the building for its originally intended purpose. It is always important, 
therefore, to consider how long the collective centre will be available before planning 
interventions.
•	
‘Lease/Rental Agreement put in place – there should be a written agreement between 
the owner of the land/property and the party who is leasing it’.
Source: Technical Guidelines for Identifying and Addressing HLP Issues in Informal Settlements/Camps and Collective 
Centres, May 2017 (http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/_assets/files/final-nrc-checklist-hlp-issues-in-informal-
settlements-and-collective-centers(1).pdf).


===== PAGE 170 =====
160    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Undertake due diligence to ensure that activities are rooted in a knowledge of legal 
conditions. Due diligence is the cornerstone of HLP rights. The aim is that those engaging 
in HLP have as clear an understanding as possible of the operating context concerning land 
and tenure. This includes understanding land rights, working to avoid the future threat that 
affected people may be forcibly evicted from the arrangements planned and preventing the 
risk of igniting conflict around construction activities. The example in Box 4.1 discusses the 
steps for enacting due diligence in camps in northern Syria.
For more information on due diligence, see Shelter Cluster, Land Rights and Shelter: The Due 
Diligence Standard, 2013 (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/Due%20
diligence%20in%20shelter-A4.pdf).
Engage with reality
There is often a gap between the reality of what actually happens and the laws that dictate 
what should happen (referred to above as de jure and de facto). Complex HLP arrange-
ments also mean that not everything that would be ideal will be possible. In the past, efforts 
may have ‘pushed for certain unworkable solutions, such as mass resettlement, rental 
ceilings and moratoriums on evictions, rather than accepting that such solutions were 
unrealistic’.21 The example from Haiti in Box 4.2 illustrates some of the difficulties encoun-
tered in complex situations. 
21	  Levine et al., Avoiding Reality.
Box 4.2  Addressing land tenure in Port-au-Prince  
After the 2010 Haiti earthquake, many humanitarian organisations struggled with complex 
land tenure arrangements in Port-au-Prince. The scale of the crisis put pressure on 
organisations that had never had to address the complexity of land tenure in this way 
before. When organisations began to clear rubble and debris, this created conflict with 
some residents who felt that the debris was the only thing they had to identify their land. 
In this tense environment, it was unclear whether it was possible to address land issues 
at all. In the Katye project, implementing organisations PCI (formerly Project Concern 
International) and CHF International sought to rebuild the Ravine Pintade neighbourhood. 
They engaged extensively with community members before removing debris, and used 
a community consensus process to verify land rights. This allowed debris removal and 
emergency shelter activities to go ahead, and paved the way for further community 
participation in planning the neighbourhood’s reconstruction.
Source: Campbell (forthcoming, 2019).


===== PAGE 171 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    161
Chapter 4
For more on land issues in the Haiti earthquake see S. Levine et al., Avoiding Reality: 
Land, Institutions and Humanitarian Action in Post-earthquake Haiti (London: ODI, 2012) 
(https://www.odi.org/publications/6979-avoiding-reality-land-institutions-and-
humanitarian-action-post-earthquake-haiti).
4.1.4  Addressing HLP issues in shelter programmes
As the above example from Haiti illustrates, shelter and settlement programmes in post-
disaster reconstruction need to fully engage with HLP issues. In displacement situations 
(i.e. involving IDPs, refugees and people displaced by disasters and violence) this can 
include working with existing neighbourhoods to ensure that new arrivals are sufficiently 
accepted, and investing in local neighbourhoods, including infrastructure and services, so 
that incoming and host populations equally benefit. Concerning rental situations, firming 
up rental agreements and providing support for resolving disputes is a key activity. Here it 
may be beneficial to place rental agreements in the names of both women and men in a 
household in contexts where women may be especially vulnerable.22
Provide support to prevent unlawful evictions
Forced eviction is a humanitarian concern in displacement situations as well as in post-
disaster contexts (failure to engage with the threat of evictions undoes recovery and support 
efforts and increases protection risks). NRC’s advice is to undertake assessments in eviction 
situations to differentiate between forced evacuations and lawful evictions. In the former 
there are grounds to provide legal support. CRS’ experience in the response to Typhoon 
22	  NRC, Security of Tenure in Urban Areas.
Box 4.3  Community rental agreements in Lebanon  
‘While implementing a neighbourhood approach project in several neighbourhoods 
in Lebanon, Care International provided infrastructure upgrades for vulnerable Syrian 
and Lebanese households (a mixture of renters and owners). Where the household was 
renting, an agreement was signed by the renter, landlord and a representative from 
a community committee which gave consent for the works to be implemented, and 
promised the tenant would not be evicted or face a rental increase for a given period of 
time. While the rental agreements would not be enforceable by law, the involvement of 
a community committee helped to ensure these agreements were upheld. Monitoring 
has shown that a high percentage of tenants who received assistance in this project are 
still living in the upgraded home and had not been evicted or had their rent increased, 
even 1–2 years after the agreement had expired’.
Source:  Quoted from forthcoming ALNAP case study, May 2019.


===== PAGE 172 =====
162    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Haiyan in Tacloban city in 2013 highlighted the need to enable safe tenure conditions by 
facilitating notarisation or legalisation of rental or land usage contracts, and to coordinate 
with local authorities on referral pathways for legal support to tenants. The example in Box 
4.4 summarises research concerning evictions and the support provided by agencies.  
Provide legal support to access documentation
Humanitarian organisations can support crises-affected people to reclaim their HLP rights by 
facilitating access to legal support to replace lost identification and documentation. In Iraq, 
one individual who had been denied food rations because she did not have identification was 
given access to rations following the intervention of a lawyer provided by IRC and UNHCR.23 
Identity needs will vary by person – for example, some individuals will find it particularly 
difficult to obtain legal recognition, and may not want digital records of their identity, such 
as people fleeing persecution.24
23	  J. St. Thomas King and D. Ardis, ‘Identity Crisis? Documentation for the Displaced in Iraq’, Humanitarian Exchange 
65, November 2015 (https://odihpn.org/magazine/identity-crisis-documentation-for-the-displaced-in-iraq/).
24	  Wilson and Casswell, Recognising Urban Refugees in Jordan.
Box 4.4  Evictions in Lebanon  
‘A study of UN-Habitat and UNHCR in 2014 in Lebanon indicated how most eviction 
cases are due to refugees’ inability to pay their agreed rental fees. Other reasons for 
eviction were related to security concerns; either local tensions or proximity to an Army 
position. It was found that eviction often takes place outside of a legal framework and in 
violation of both international and Lebanese national laws. Moreover, refugees often do 
not have access to courts to address objections.
‘Refugees often resort to social networks. Mediation and legal advice offered by 
international NGOs are effective means in addressing HLP protection concerns. 
Although taking a rights-based approach should be the main focus, it may be 
complemented by market-based incentives to effectively ensure refugees’ HLP 
protection. For example, state private land and awkaf (religious endowment land) can 
offer formal opportunities to improve regulation of landlord tenant relations’.
Source: Quoted from UN-Habitat and UNHCR, HLP Issues in Lebanon: Implications of the Syrian Refugee Crisis 
(Beirut: UNHCR, 2014) (https://data2.unhcr.org/ar/documents/download/41590).


===== PAGE 173 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    163
Monitor and evaluate tenure
This is often overlooked, but is essential if understandings of tenure are to be improved, 
both within active programmes and also for longer-term activities in other crises. As 
noted above, monitoring and evaluation should be undertaken within multi-sectoral, 
holistic programme approaches, such as ABAs (discussed in Section 3.2). Monitoring and 
evaluation is discussed in Section 3.10.
Use advocacy measures to improve tenure
Advocacy concerns improving the operating environment in which agencies enact 
programmes. Activities and outcomes of successful advocacy can include liaising with city 
authorities to ensure that displaced people have fair access to resources, where disputes 
can be resolved and where refugees’ access to formal employment can be secured. 
Advocacy approaches range from informally engaging decision-makers to formal positions 
and statements (these may be more successful when agencies are aligned). Advocacy can 
however be risky depending on the nature of governance in a particular setting, and the 
freedom civil society enjoys to criticise power-holders.
After Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines, a number of organisations advocated to the 
government against the imposition of a ‘no build zone’. One national NGO, Urban Poor 
Associates, supported by Christian Aid, organised 200,000 families in a campaign against 
the policy, resulting in a government agreement to cease evictions until permanent and 
decent housing was available, and securing the right to build transitional shelters.25
In summary, HLP rights cannot be overlooked in humanitarian action in urban settings. 
In post-disaster recovery, decisions on location that ignore HLP can lead to wasted 
investments, while in protracted crises the vulnerability of affected households may be 
heightened by uncertainty around where they live. Failure to address tenure adequately can 
lead to conflict and violence. Effective HLP engagement therefore involves understanding 
the context, identifying barriers, engaging with relevant actors (landlords, the private 
sector, municipal authorities and affected people) and, perhaps above all, given the 
subject’s complexity, deciding on what can realistically be achieved over what timeframe. 
25	  V. Dubuisson and A. T. Escandor, ‘After Haiyan: Life on Hold in the “No Build Zone”’, Christian Aid Global, undated 
(https://medium.com/philippines-haiyan-s-legacy/after-haiyan-life-on-hold-in-the-no-build-zone-1a3fc00203ff).
Chapter 4


===== PAGE 174 =====
164    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
4.2 Shelter and settlements
Shelter refers to a safe place for people to sleep, eat and carry out household functions. In 
urban areas, while there are a range of options for meeting shelter needs, there are also 
a number of challenges. In cities, many different forms of shelter exist, including shacks 
in informal settlements, apartments, individual rooms with shared services, shared 
accommodation, temporary hostels, high-rise buildings and individual houses. In many 
cities, people also live on the street and in parks in makeshift structures. 
Settlements relates to the areas where people live and form communities, such as 
neighbourhoods, often with high densities, shared services and shared public spaces.
This section discusses some of the challenges and opportunities in enacting urban shelter and 
settlements activities. It covers damage assessments, cash transfer programming, technical 
support, settlements-based approaches, building local skills and recovery and location 
considerations. Examples are provided from rapid-onset disasters and protracted crises.
Useful resources  
As with other sectors discussed in this section, HLP is a wide-ranging and cross-sectoral 
topic. For further guidance, see the Global Protection Cluster, ‘HLP Essential Guidance 
by Themes’ (http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/en/tools-and-guidance/essential-
protection-guidance-and-tools/hlp-essential-guidance-and-tools/hlp-essential-
guidance-by-themes.html).
Global Shelter Cluster, ‘Housing Land and Property’ (https://www.sheltercluster.org/hlp).
M. Wyckoff, Securing Tenure in Shelter Operations: Guidance for Humanitarian Response 
(Oslo: NRC, 2016) (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/nrc_shelter_
tenure_guidance_external.pdf).
IFRC, Rapid Tenure Assessment Guidelines for Post-disaster Response Planning: Pilot 
Version (Geneva: IFRC, 2015) (http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/_assets/files/
tools_and_guidance/housing_land_property/ifrc-nrc-hlp-report-2016.pdf).
K. Abhas et al., Safer Homes, Stronger Communities: A Handbook for Reconstructing after 
Natural Disasters (Washington DC: World Bank, 2010) (http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/290301468159328458/pdf/528390PUB0safe101Official0Use0Only1.pdf).
NRC and IRC, The Importance of Addressing Housing, Land, and Property (HLP): 
Challenges in Humanitarian Response (http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/_assets/
files/tools_and_guidance/housing_land_property/ifrc-nrc-hlp-report-2016.pdf).


===== PAGE 175 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    165
Chapter 4
This section links to a number of others in this Good Practice Review. It links closely to Section 
1.3 on displacement. The many forms of rights to live in places, i.e. tenure and its relationship 
to housing, land and property (HLP) rights, is a vital component of shelter, discussed in 
Section 4.1. Using cash, for example to subsidise rents for refugees, is also an important tool. 
Cash is discussed in Section 3.3. Shelter and settlements also relate closely to protection 
(Section 4.7) and WASH (Section 4.4). In programming terms, it especially relates to area-
based approaches (ABAs) (Section 3.2), and links closely with market assessments.
4.2.1 Challenges 
Addressing shelter and settlement needs in a post-disaster setting has been described as 
‘one of the most intractable problems in international humanitarian response’.26 In urban 
areas there are a number of challenges, including:
•	
Density, leading to a lack of space. After a rapid-onset disaster spontaneous camps 
often appear, where households gather in open spaces such as parks and squares 
and may build temporary shelters. Space is at a premium, with ensuing problems of 
water, sanitation and protection. 
•	
Verticality. Urban living includes living in high-rise buildings. After a rapid-onset 
disaster, the repair of such buildings may be outside the scope of operational agencies. 
•	
Timeframe. In displacement situations, the shelter and housing needs of refugees 
and IDPs may last for years or decades. In post-disaster situations, people may be in 
temporary camps and living in makeshift shelters for years (as was the case in Port-
au-Prince following the earthquake in 2010).
•	
Government controls. While this is an operational reality for all stages of pro-
gramming across all sectors, in many post-disaster situations governments – for 
their own reasons – have prevented agencies from engaging in shelter recovery 
programmes, for example following the 2005 earthquake in Pakistan.
•	
Land ownership, which can be complex and varied. For instance, land that may appear 
vacant may be owned by absentee landlords; people living in ‘illegal’ settlements 
may be omitted from rebuilding efforts (see Section 4.1 on HLP rights).
•	
Linking to long-term municipal planning decisions. Temporary housing often becomes 
permanent, with quick decisions such as where to site a camp leading to long-term 
consequences. Where to locate camps therefore is a critical planning issue, but one 
that is sometimes omitted when enacting relief and recovery operations (see below).
26	  P. Ashdown, Humanitarian Emergency Response Review (London: Humanitarian Emergency Response Review, 
2011) (www.alnap.org/help-library/humanitarian-emergency-response-review), p. 25.


===== PAGE 176 =====
166    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Diversity of stakeholders. The multiplicity of actors in urban settings (including the 
private sector, civil society, political parties and spontaneous volunteer groups), as 
with other sectors, means that time is needed for negotiation if a degree of consensus 
is required (see Section 1.5 on urban actors).
The Global Shelter Cluster’s inaugural State of the Humanitarian Shelter and Settlements 
2018 report27 emphasises the need to take an ‘urban approach’ to enacting shelter 
programmes in cities, meaning taking a systems view of the city (discussed previously in 
Section 1.1), understanding the context (see Section 5.5), adopting a cross-sectoral approach 
(see Section 2.1), aligning humanitarian action with longer-term development and planning 
considerations, such as protection and HLP rights (discussed in Sections 4.7 and 4.1). 
As the Global Shelter Cluster acknowledges, a systemic challenge in urban shelter provision 
has been that the global shelter approach, until relatively recently, has been geared towards 
the provision of physical shelter products, such as tarpaulins, tents, temporary shelters 
27	  Global Shelter Cluster, State of the Humanitarian Shelter and Settlements Report (Geneva: IFRC and UNHCR, 2018) 
(https://www.sheltercluster.org/resources/library/state-humanitarian-shelter-and-settlements).
Box 4.5  Urban shelter needs in the Nepal earthquakes  
Three of the 14 districts worst affected by the earthquakes in Nepal in 2015 were in 
towns and cities, with the government’s Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) 
reporting that 25% of the damage occurred in urban areas. However, urban response 
was largely overlooked. One report notes that: ‘In urban areas, renters whose rental 
accommodation was damaged or destroyed by the earthquake are a potentially very 
vulnerable group that there is little information on, especially as they are outside of the 
reconstruction grant programme’.
Research among 13 international NGOs that responded to the earthquakes appears to 
confirm this omission. As one key informant stated, urban areas ‘got camps, relief items 
and cash, and there it stopped’. Another said that their organisation did not work in 
urban areas as these were ‘not comfortable’. A third key informant stated that ‘urban 
people have been left out just because they look better’. A fourth said that the response 
‘missed urban affected communities, areas and issues’. In a survey of NGO personnel, 
in response to the statement ‘Sufficient attention was given to affected urban areas’, 
no one strongly agreed and 17% agreed, while 59% were neutral and 24% disagreed or 
strongly disagreed.
Source: D. Sanderson et al., Nepal Earthquakes Appeal Meta-synthesis (London: DEC, 2019).


===== PAGE 177 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    167
(of various types) and shelter kits. While these can be useful in urban areas – especially 
tarpaulins and tents in an immediate post-disaster situation – temporary shelter in urban 
areas has proved problematic, for reasons including space constraints, the time taken to 
deliver it and the cost.28 There is also growing awareness of the environmental costs of the 
provision of temporary materials.29
For further discussion of these issues, see A. Kadihasanoglu, ‘Shelter in the City: The New 
Game-changer’, in Global Shelter Cluster, State of the Humanitarian Shelter and Settlements 
Report (Geneva: IFRC and UNHCR, 2018) (https://www.sheltercluster.org/resources/library/
state-humanitarian-shelter-and-settlements).
4.2.2 Opportunities 
Cities, by their nature, offer varied approaches and opportunities for shelter and settlements 
programming. Many do not include building temporary shelters (beyond perhaps tents in 
open spaces after a rapid-onset disaster), but rather are about reusing and/or reconstructing 
existing building stock (see damage assessments, section 4.2.3), or using financial 
mechanisms and rental arrangements. For instance, support to rent apartments or rooms 
is widely provided in many displacement situations involving refugees and IDPs (see the 
Lebanon case study in Box 4.8). Figure 4.1 identifies different typologies for urban shelter 
pre- and post-disaster, for displaced and non-displaced populations.
Deciding what not to do is perhaps at least as important as deciding what to do. Rebuilding 
a ten-storey apartment building is probably beyond the timeframe, affordability and remit 
of most agencies. A key question, as with other sectors, must be: how can limited resources 
best help those affected? Concerning shelter, housing an urban population is more in the 
remit of city planning and government decision-making. To these ends, whatever actions aid 
agencies take in this sector ought to consider both meeting immediate basic needs, but also, 
where possible, how to invest in the long-term recovery of affected households, especially 
the most vulnerable.
The essential fact (illustrated well by the Baghdad case study in Box 4.6) is that successful 
shelter programmes are heavily process-oriented. This is a key point repeatedly made 
throughout the Global Shelter Cluster’s State of the Humanitarian Shelter and Settlements 
2018 report – that failure to engage sufficiently in process, for instance the inclusion of 
28	  See for example D. Sanderson et al., ‘Lost in Transition: Principles, Practice and Lessons from Haiti for Urban Post-
Disaster Shelter Recovery Programs’, Asian Journal of Environment and Disaster Management (AJEDM) 6(2).
29	  See Section 4.3 on debris management. This is also discussed by Jake Zarins in the chapter on ‘Leading by 
Example: Looking to the Future for the Shelter and Settlements Sector’, in Global Shelter Cluster, State of Humanitarian 
Shelter and Settlements Report.


===== PAGE 178 =====
168    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
168    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Figure 4.1  Urban pre- and post-disaster housing options
Pre-disaster settled population
Temporary or permanent shelter
Post-disaster non-displaced population
Temporary or transitional 
shelter; repair or reconstruction
Post-disaster non-displaced population
Temporary or transitional shelter
Durable solutions
Reconstruction, resettlement, reintegration
Settlement typologies
Disaster
Settlement typologies
Settlement typologies
House 
owner-
occupier
House 
owner-
occupier
Dispersed self-
settlement with 
no legal status
Hosting by 
families
Self-settled, 
unplanned 
camps
Short-term land, 
house or apartment 
tenant
Collective 
centres
Planned and 
managed 
camps
Land 
tenant
Land 
tenant
House 
tenant
House 
tenant
Apartment 
owner-
occupier
Apartment 
owner-
occupier
Occupancy 
with no legal 
status
Occupancy 
with no legal 
status
Apartment 
tenant
Apartment 
tenant
Source: IFRC and SKAT, Sustainable Reconstruction in Urban Areas: A Handbook (Geneva and St. Gallen: IFRC and 
SKAT, 2012) (www.urban-response.org/resource/6393).


===== PAGE 179 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    169
people in critical decisions on location, undermines eventual shelter programmes. As 
the report notes, quoting shelter practitioner Graham Saunders, programmes that do 
not engage sufficiently in process (and focus on the shelter product alone) ‘fail to maxi-
mize local enterprize opportunities or acknowledge cultural or contextual concerns, 
and reflect the relative lack of involvement of specifiers and end-users in the design and 
development process’.30
4.2.3 Damage assessments 
Damage assessments are used to evaluate the state of buildings and infrastructure following 
a disaster. ALNAP and RedR31 identify the following forms of damage assessment:
•	
Rapid Visual Assessments (RVAs), an initial review of the quality of a building or 
infrastructure, undertaken by trained teams.
•	
Structural Integrity and Damage Assessments (SIDAs) undertaken by engineers and 
other suitably qualified personnel.
•	
Detailed Engineering Assessments (DEAs), also undertaken by engineers and other 
suitably qualified personnel.
30	  Global Shelter Cluster, State of the Humanitarian Shelter and Settlements Report, p. 3.
31	  See Sophie Grimaud and Leah Campbell, Shelter and Settlements Response in Urban Emergencies, ALNAP and 
RedR, 2016 (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/alnap-redr-urban-learning-report.pdf)
Box 4.6  Shelter reconstruction in Baghdad  
An urban shelter response in Baghdad undertaken by NRC illustrates the need to engage 
with the complexity of the situation, and that adequate programming takes time and 
involves building relations. Four steps are identified. The first is ‘positioning’, involving 
engaging with stakeholders, identifying challenges and opportunities, learning from 
history and learning from recent responses. The second step is ‘analysing’, which 
comprises understanding the context (using context analysis – further discussed in 
Section 5.5 – looking at institutions, relations and power) and developing a theory of 
change. The third step is ‘strategising’, including identifying entry points, precedents 
and trade-offs. The fourth step is ‘implementing’, including accessing information, 
knowing where to look, knowing who to ask, building a team and building relationships 
with governments and communities.
Source: L. Heykoop and F. Kelling, Lessons from Baghdad: A Shift in Approach to Urban Shelter Response 
(Oslo: NRC, 2014).


===== PAGE 180 =====
170    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
The research has recommended undertaking assessments on a neighbourhood-by-
neighbourhood basis and being aware of population movements (given that, post-disaster, 
people may move temporarily elsewhere, and return later on).
See also Section 4.3 on debris management.
4.2.4 Using cash programming in shelter
As with other sectors, using cash provides greater choice in the kinds of activities that can 
be undertaken.32 Cash has obvious traction in urban areas where markets exist. For housing 
recovery, affected people may use cash for rent or to rebuild, or use the money to move to 
a better location – something which may be especially attractive to people living in poor-
quality and unsanitary conditions (see the case study on Haiti in Box 4.9). Cash programming 
in relation to shelter also encourages an ‘owner-driven approach’ (as opposed to a ‘donor-
driven approach’), long recognised as beneficial in supporting local people to make their 
own decisions. 
In protracted crises, cash transfer programming provides options for households, in 
particular in cities where there are functioning rental markets (which is just about 
everywhere). Cash also has application in rapid-onset disasters, in terms of giving people 
greater choice, enabling local purchases of materials (thus supporting local markets, 
vendors and materials) and reducing transaction costs. Shelter practitioners also note that 
a challenge remains in ensuring technical quality (if technical assistance is not included as 
part of a shelter cash programme).
32	  This does not refer to grant payments provided by governments, often in the form of tranches, as for example 
following earthquakes in Pakistan (2005) and Nepal (2015).
Box 4.7  RVAs in Nepal and Haiti  
An RVA of buildings was carried out in Nepal after the 2015 earthquakes. Assessors 
conducted both internal and external inspections. Later assessments were carried out 
by engineers. After the 2010 Haiti earthquake, satellite imagery was used (comparing 
locations before and after the disaster) as part of a damage assessment process that took 
some 14 months to complete. Buildings were marked with a simple colour coding: safe 
buildings were marked green, more risky buildings yellow and dangerous buildings red.
For further discussion, see S. Grimaud and L. Campbell, Shelter and Settlements Response in Urban Emergencies, 
ALNAP and RedR, 2016. (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/alnap-redr-urban-
learning-report.pdf).


===== PAGE 181 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    171
Quality improvements can be achieved by adding conditions or restrictions on the use of 
funds by recipients of assistance. For example, conditional transfers imply that households 
meet certain quality targets before receiving the next tranche. Restricted cash transfers 
imply that recipients need to use the funds for specific purposes or buy from selected 
vendors. This allows for monitoring of the quality of construction materials.
Research from ALNAP and RedR33 notes that ‘cash response can create shocks in urban 
markets as it generates artificial inflation and impacts availability and access to markets’. To 
reduce this risk, the research recommends undertaking market assessments, for example of 
the rental market, construction markets and supply chains. Cash modalities and methods of 
market analysis are discussed further in Section 3.3 on cash and markets.
See also:
Global WASH and Shelter Cluster Joint Advocacy Paper ‘Increasing Sectoral Cash Transfer 
and Market Based Programming Capacity’, undated (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/
default/files/docs/wash_shelter_cash_advocacy_paper_-_final_version.pdf).
Global Shelter Cluster, Shelter Cash Champion Deployments: Updates and Lessons Learnt 
(https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/lessons_learned_shelter_cash_
champion_june_6_2018.pdf).
4.2.5 Providing shelter assistance with technical support
In shelter building programmes, combining materials with practical training and technical 
assistance is vital. Failure to do so may make rebuilt structures more dangerous than the 
ones that were there before. Experience also shows that, within neighbourhoods, decision-
making needs to be transparent, with the ongoing engagement of affected households. 
This can be a lengthy process, but it is a vital one given that, for most households, a home 
represents their biggest asset. In shelter programmes using cash transfers, structural 
quality may not be fully adhered to by recipients of assistance, for example because stronger 
construction costs more money.
4.2.6 Settlements-based approaches 
For recovery involving reconstruction, a settlements-based approach has been shown to 
work well in urban areas. Based on long-standing principles of urban planning, settlements-
based approaches focus on long-term recovery programmes working with neighbourhood 
groups in local contexts, combining different sectors (such as WASH and protection). 
33	  Grimaud and Campbell, Shelter and Settlements Response in Urban Emergencies. 
Chapter 4


===== PAGE 182 =====
172    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Settlements-based approaches have attracted a lot of interest in the last few years in 
particular. Also known as area-based approaches (ABAs), this is discussed in Section 3.2. 
A wider settlements-based approach underscores that shelter and settlements programmes 
involve, not just shelter or housing, but also infrastructure, such as roads, walls and steps, 
and services, such as water, sanitation and lighting. Any programme therefore needs to treat 
this as a multifaceted reconstruction project, with associated technical skills, foresight, links 
to planning, adherence to building regulations and links to other sectors. This is complex and 
takes a long time.
4.2.7 Building local skills
If engaging in reconstruction, use this to contribute to the local economy and also strengthen 
skills. Supporting local businesses to supply construction materials that are locally sourced 
helps generate jobs and income. Shelter reconstruction programmes can include training for 
craftspeople, masons and carpenters, providing a form of investment in long-term recovery. 
Training should be high-quality, for example through the use of certified schemes recognised 
by employers (see Section 4.5 on livelihoods). 
4.2.8 Recovery and location considerations
In the reconstruction of settlements, policy and practice has been to keep households in 
their original locations, if it is safe to do so, to maintain social and historic ties. The World 
Box 4.8  Shelter support in Lebanon 
Over 80% of Syrian refugees living in Lebanon are in urban areas. In 2013 the NRC began 
a programme working with landlords to improve existing buildings, to then rent out 
to refugees for a fixed period. The programme aims to assist refugees by investing in 
infrastructure and the local economy, for example through paying builders and other 
craftspeople to make improvements. As well as improving buildings, the programme 
focuses on adequate water and sanitation facilities and providing information, counselling 
and legal assistance, for example on contract disputes with landlords. A report on 
NRC’s activities states: ‘As a result of the intervention, NRC has supported thousands of 
vulnerable families with rent-free hosting, invested resources in the local community 
and increased the affordable housing market. Through household-level information and 
counselling, refugees have been able to access services and make use of their rights. 
An evaluation carried out in 2015 found that the win-win approach increased host 
community acceptance of refugees’.
Source: Humanitarian Shelter and Settlements Guidelines, Thematic Policy Document No 9 (Brussels: ECHO, 2017).


===== PAGE 183 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    173
Bank’s disaster recovery guidelines state that ‘Relocation disrupts lives and should be 
minimized’.34 Following the Haiti earthquake, UN-Habitat adopted a strategy of ‘safe 
return’ (i.e. rebuilding in the original neighbourhood if safe to do so); following the 1985 
Mexico City earthquake, homeless residents were encouraged to camp close to or in their 
neighbourhoods while reconstruction took place. 
This approach may not apply in all circumstances (for example where land is rendered 
dangerous from landslides). It is also questionable for people living in informal settlements 
and sub-standard living conditions. In these circumstances, relocation elsewhere may 
well be a better option. The case study in Box 4.9 presents experience following the Haiti 
earthquake, where neighbourhoods living in poor conditions have relocated. 
In summary, there are a range of options for enacting programmes for people affected by 
rapid-onset disasters or forcibly displaced by conflict. At the same time, shelter programming 
is complex and multifaceted. Post-disaster reconstruction is slow, expensive and beset by 
challenges, some of which have been identified in this section. Urban shelter programming 
differs markedly from rural shelter recovery programmes (on which the experience of 
the shelter sector is largely based), and planned refugee camps, for obvious reasons of 
space, density, complex land ownership arrangements, markets and building restrictions. 
Urban shelter programmes are often as much (if not more) to do with rental markets and 
34	  World Bank, Safer Homes, Stronger Communities: A Handbook for Reconstructing Housing and Communities after 
Natural Disasters, GFDRR, 2010 (www.urban-response.org/resource/12606), p. ix.
Box 4.9  Construction in Canaan, Haiti   
Over 200,000 homes and more than a million people were displaced by the earthquake in 
Haiti in January 2010. The severity of the damage, combined with pre-disaster population 
densities (with many people living in poor-quality tenements), caused large numbers 
of people to move out of the capital Port-au-Prince, to an empty piece of land called 
Canaan. By the end of 2016, the population of Canaan had increased to 200,000, making it 
the country’s fourth-largest urban area. This ‘represents a massive mobilization of local 
grass-roots organization and private and/or redirected humanitarian resources’. The rapid 
growth of Canaan is attributed to the government declaring the area public land in 2010, 
which led to informal growth and house-building by investors. This is not new – ‘Port-au-
Prince had seen opportunistic rapid urbanization during previous periods of political and 
economic crisis over the past two decades’. The lessons from Canaan point to the capacity 
of affected people to determine and act on their own recovery.
Source: M. Stephenson, ‘Learning from People’s Actions: Canaan, Port-au-Prince, Haiti’, Box 6.5 in IFRC, World 
Disasters Report (Geneva: IFRC, 2016).


===== PAGE 184 =====
174    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
landlords than they are to do with agency-driven physical reconstruction. Successful 
shelter programmes take note of this complexity and plan for long-term, neighbourhood-
oriented and inclusive recovery programmes, such as those described in Section 3.2 on ABAs.
4.3 Debris and disaster waste management 
After a rapid-onset urban disaster such as an earthquake, landslide or tsunami, millions 
of tons of rubble need clearing and, where possible, reusing. Large amounts of rubble and 
debris also must be cleared during and after armed conflict, as well as unexploded bombs, 
munitions and booby traps, known as explosive remnants of war (ERWs). 
This section defines debris and disaster waste; identifies hazard types and the kinds of 
waste that can result from disasters and conflict; and key actors and good practice in debris 
clearance. The section ends with a discussion of ERW. 
4.3.1 Defining debris and disaster waste
Debris can be defined as ‘a mixture of building waste and rubble typically arising from 
damaged buildings and their demolition. This waste stream can include natural materials 
such as clay and mud, trees, branches, bushes, etc’.35 The broader term ‘disaster waste’ 
includes ‘all solid and liquid waste generated from a disaster, not limited to debris’.36 Within 
humanitarian response, debris clearance is often coordinated by the shelter cluster, while 
waste management falls under WASH (see Section 4.4).
Table 4.2 identifies some of the types of waste that can result from disasters and armed 
conflict. 
4.3.2 Key actors 
A wide range of actors are engaged/can engage in debris management, including:
•	
People working in the informal economy collecting and recycling waste – in many 
cities, waste picking and recycling is a large factor in the lives of many poorer people. 
35	  OCHA, Disaster Waste Management Guidelines, 2011 (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/
Debris%20Management%20Guidelines%202010.pdf), p. 6.
36	  The full list is: ‘concrete, steel, wood, clay, tar elements from damaged buildings, infrastructure, household 
furnishings, parts from power and telephone grids such as electrical poles, wire, electronic equipment, 
transformers, parts from water and sewage distribution centres, natural debris such as trees, mud and plants, 
chemicals, dyes and other raw materials from industries and workshops, waste from relief operations, damaged 
boats, cars, buses, bicycles, unexploded ordnances (UX), packaging materials, pesticides and fertilizers, paint, 
varnish and solvents and healthcare waste’.


===== PAGE 185 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    175
Earthquakes
Structures collapse ‘in-situ’, i.e. floor slabs collapse on top of each other, trapping waste within damaged buildings and structures. This can lead to 
challenges in sorting out hazardous waste (e.g. asbestos) from non-hazardous (e.g. general building rubble).
Handling waste often requires heavy machinery, which communities may not be able to afford or have difficulty to access.
Collapsed buildings may overlap across streets, making access difficult for the search and rescue and relief operations.
Quantities of waste are high compared to other disaster types since all building contents normally become waste.
Flooding
Floods often lead to mass displacement, which in turn requires shelters and camps and leads to large volumes of household wastes.
Initial damage depends on the structural integrity of infrastructure, while building contents are normally damaged extensively. Mould may be present 
and timber may have begun to rot.
Buildings are typically stripped by owners and waste placed on roads for collection. Waste is often mixed with hazardous materials such as household 
cleaning products and electronic goods.
Flooding may bring mud, clay and gravel into affected areas, making access difficult once the floodwater recedes. Removal may be required for relief 
and recovery operations. The mud, clay and gravel may be mixed with hazardous materials, requiring further assessment before dumping.
Tsunami
Strong tsunamis can cause widespread damage to infrastructure, spreading debris over large areas. Debris is often mixed with soils, trees, bushes and 
other loose objects such as vehicles. This makes waste difficult to handle and segregate.
Strong winds can tear the roof off buildings, after which they may collapse.
Poorly constructed houses and huts can ‘fold’ under roof tops. Even brick and concrete walls may collapse.
Waste is spread over open land, streets and marketplaces. This would include roofing materials, small items and dust carried by the wind. This may 
cause serious problems where asbestos is present.
Ships and boats are often thrown ashore and destroyed, requiring specialised waste management. Vessels that sink in harbours need to be removed.
Electrical and telephone grids as well as transformers containing oil and PCBs may be destroyed.
Intense, short-term conflicts can involve rockets, missiles and bombs, which, combined with land combat, result in damage to buildings and 
infrastructure, key strategic installations being bombed and/or widespread damage to industrial and residential areas.
Damaged infrastructure is often burnt, resulting in the destruction of most internal furnishings and fittings. This reduces the quantities of debris to 
be managed and leaves primarily non-flammable items such as concrete, bricks and stones. Bridges, roadways, railway structures, etc. are often 
targeted. Their clearing requires heavy machinery such as excavators and bulldozers.
Waste collection vehicles may be damaged or be commandeered for military purposes.
Unexploded ordnance (UXO) including undetonated landmines may be present among waste.
Protracted conflicts share similarities with short-term, intense conflicts, but there is often more widespread damage to building and infrastructure, 
and increased use of landmines on or near strategic roadways and facilities.
Table 4.2 Hazard types and waste
Source: OCHA, Disaster Waste Management Guidelines, 2011 (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/Debris%20Management%20Guidelines%202010.pdf), p. 6.
Hurricanes, 
typhoons, 
cyclones
Conflict – short 
term
Conflict – 
protracted


===== PAGE 186 =====
176    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Public and private sector solid waste management service companies. 
•	
Specialist organisations dealing in hazardous waste removal (see below).
•	
Local authorities responsible for waste management.
•	
National and city governments. 
•	
In armed conflict situations, specialist organisations experienced in the disposal of 
explosive materials (see below). 
4.3.3 Good practice in debris clearance 
A UNDP review of debris management37 in disaster and armed conflict situations identified 
the following key lessons.
Put people at the centre of debris clearance efforts. In contexts without hazardous materials, 
the review notes that ‘debris removal and recycling is inextricably linked to getting the 
community back onto its feet in the often slow and painstaking job of returning to normalcy’. 
Start clearance immediately, given that a comprehensive debris management plan may take 
several months to formulate and adopt. Main arteries should be cleared first, followed by 
markets and schools. Hazardous sites should be cleared last, to discourage people from 
moving to them.38   
Balance the above with a recognition of the value of debris. Debris provides materials 
for emergency shelter as well as fuel for heating and cooking food or boiling water. Much 
debris has value to the owner and considerable use in the recovery effort. As CARE notes, 
‘Simply collecting and disposing of all debris without taking these factors into account will 
make the recovery process more costly and more difficult than if the debris is transformed 
into a positive contribution to recovery’.39 Studies indicate that 30%–40% of urban debris 
is recyclable, and metals and plastics can be sold both locally and internationally. Debris 
removal also provides an opportunity to build capacity through coordination, communication 
and partnerships between the private sector, NGOs and local authorities. Debris clearance is 
also an opportunity for cash for work programmes. 
Be respectful of personal belongings, which may be mixed up with rubble. Rubble itself may 
be seen as a personal possession, for instance where it demarks a residence. In a number of 
37	  UNDP, Disaster Waste Management Guidelines, 2010 (https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/
Disaster%20Waste%20Management%20Guidelines%202010.pdf).
38	  J. Kennedy, ‘Post-disaster Rubble Removal Strategies: Having the Elbow-room to be Resilient’, 24 August 2013 
(http://resilienturbanism.org/guest_blogger/rubble-removal-strategies/).
39	  CARE International and ProAct Network, Emergency Shelter Cluster Quick Guide: Post-Disaster Debris Management, 
undated, p. 1.


===== PAGE 187 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    177
instances in Haiti after the 2010 earthquake, the presence of rubble was the only proof of land 
ownership (see Section 4.1 on HLP rights). 
Be mindful of health and safety – such as safety clothing for people working on clearance. 
UNDP recommends a group health insurance scheme for workers, including those engaged 
in cash for work programmes.
Strike a balance between the social benefits of labour-intensive rubble removal involving 
local communities and engaging private companies, which may utilise heavy machinery, for 
example bulldozers, and get the job done much more quickly. 
Assess the quantity of rubble to be removed40 in order to plan the work at hand: the 
timeframe, equipment and labour needed and the means of removal and disposal. 
Debris removal should take into account traffic conditions and the time it is likely to take. 
Unusable rubble needs to be transported to areas where it will not cause problems later. 
This needs planning.
Additional good practice includes:
Recycling opportunities exist for plastic sheeting. Plastic sheeting is one of the most 
common items of emergency assistance following a rapid-onset disaster. Given the volume 
of such assistance, recycling and reusing these materials present opportunities for local 
entrepreneurs and others. A Global Shelter Cluster Operational Guidance Note provides 
advice on the repair, reuse and disposal of plastic sheeting – see https://www.sheltercluster.
org/sites/default/files/docs/recycling_reuse_and_disposal_of_plastic_sheeting.pdf.
Hazardous materials need specialist clearance. Often, debris can include toxic elements, for 
instance composites of construction materials. These should be analysed at an early stage 
through rapid assessments. Once hazardous materials are found, they should be managed 
according to best practice and the legal framework in the location concerned. Asbestos 
is a common problem after disasters and requires special attention due to its impact on 
health. For further information, see https://www.sheltercluster.org/sites/default/files/docs/
Asbestos%20in%20Emergencies%202010.pdf.
4.3.4 Explosive remnants of war
Explosive remnants of war are a common danger during and after conflict. ERWs include 
landmines, booby traps, cluster munitions and unexploded ordnance, which can explode 
at any time. ERWs can stay in place for decades. Children are particularly vulnerable ‘given 
their propensity to play with foreign objects that may look like toys or otherwise attract 
40	  OCHA, Disaster Waste Management Guidelines.


===== PAGE 188 =====
178    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
their attention’.41 Contamination can also ‘contribute to population displacement, loss of 
livelihoods, impeded or obstructed access to essential infrastructure and services, and 
increased vulnerability’.42 ERWs may be within collapsed buildings, making them harder to 
detect, and finding ERWs and making them safe slows down reconstruction. Following Israeli 
airstrikes in Gaza in 2014, for example, some 7,000 ERWs were left in damaged buildings. In 
such instances, ‘the process of removing contaminated rubble is often dangerous in itself as 
unexploded ordnance can detonate and injure clearance teams’.43 
41	  ICRC and InterAction, When War Moves to Cities: Protection of Civilians in Urban Areas – Outcome Report, 2017 
(https://reliefweb.int/report/world/when-war-moves-cities-protection-civilians-urban-areas-outcome-report-
may-2017), p. 10.
42	  UN Mine Action Strategy 2019–23 (https://www.mineaction.org/sites/default/files/publications/un_mine_action_
strategy_2019-2023_lr.pdf).
43	  ICRC and InterAction, When War Moves to Cities, p. 11.  
Box 4.10 Debris removal after the Haiti earthquake
The earthquake in Haiti in 2010 produced around 10 million cubic metres of debris. In 
its aftermath, the government and the UN implemented an Action Plan for National 
Recovery and Development (PARDN), which included debris clearance and the 
demolition of dangerous buildings. Lessons include:
•	
 Ensure clarity on neighbourhood expectations, capacities and constraints.
•	
Coordinate between key actors at all levels – between different parts of 
government, and between neighbourhood leaders and other organisations, such as 
NGOs and other civil society organisations.
•	
Set up community platforms: ‘The effective participation of the population through 
community platforms must take place in the early stages of the programme and 
must consider gender and generational equity issues’.
Source: Debris Management: The Door to Development (Port-au-Prince: UNDP, 2013) (http://www.undp.org/content/
dam/undp/library/crisis%20prevention/TOI%20Interactive%20English.pdf).
For a detailed description of rubble removal efforts in Haiti, as well as a wider discussion of rubble management 
plans and challenges to rubble management, see M. Hooper, ‘When Diverse Norms Meet Weak Plans: The 
Organizational Dynamics of Urban Rubble Clearance in Post-Earthquake Haiti’, International Journal of Urban and 
Regional Research 25 September 2018 (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/1468-2427.12696).


===== PAGE 189 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    179
A number of specialist humanitarian organisations work in this area, including the Mines 
Advisory Group (MAG)44 and the Halo Trust.45 At the time of writing the Halo Trust was piloting 
a project for more effective urban demining, which aims to ‘assess the level and nature of 
explosive contamination in post-conflict urban environments, primarily in the Middle East, and 
develop new clearance methods’.46 Civilians may also sometimes engage in clearing ERWs: 
In Aleppo, the Syrian Civil Defense, or White Helmets, works to clear rubble and detonate 
ERW using nonexplosive methods. This group of volunteers also disseminates information 
about the dangers of ERW to people through discussions in schools, mosques, and other 
public spaces. When surveyed, Gazans, having experienced three conflicts between 2008 
and 2014, were well aware of methods for reporting ERW to the proper authorities; this is 
likely attributable to mine risk education efforts.47
Projects relating to ERWs also include risk awareness training, victim assistance and support 
for protection needs. Examples can be found on the database managed by UN Mine Action 
(https://www.mineaction.org/en/portfolio-of-mine-action-projects). 
International 
Mine 
Action Standards (IMAS) provides ‘criteria for all aspects of demining’, including guiding 
principles, legal requirements and responsibilities of respective actors. Further information 
can be found at: https://www.mineactionstandards.org/standards/international-mine-
action-standards-imas/imas-in-english/.
4.4 Water, sanitation and hygiene
Implementing water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) programmes in urban areas is complex 
and difficult. As a basic need, effective WASH is vital to prevent loss of life and the spread 
of disease, a consideration that in dense urban areas can be especially acute. The reliance 
of people living in cities on essential services such as water and sanitation makes them 
especially vulnerable to service disruptions during crises. 
This section48 identifies general WASH issues. It discusses WASH in protracted crises and in 
displacement settings, and reviews good practice in water and hygiene. This section links 
44	  See https://www.maginternational.org/.
45	  See https://www.halotrust.org/.
46	  The pilot, ‘Clearing Explosive Hazards in Post-conflict Environments’, is being hosted at (http://www.elrha.org/map-
location/clearing-explosive-hazards-in-post-conflict-environments/).
47	  ICRC and InterAction, When War Moves to Cities, p. 11.
48	  This section benefited in particular from the inputs of Michael Talhami, Urban Adviser – Water and Habitat Unit, ICRC.


===== PAGE 190 =====
180    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
closely to a number of others in this review, including health, protection, shelter and cash, 
and of course to all sections relating to project management. 
4.4.1 WASH challenges
The range and quality of urban WASH is vast, from sewage and water supply systems in 
the wealthier parts of cities to the almost complete absence of water and sanitation 
facilities in informal settlements. Vital components of WASH interventions include social 
and institutional factors (for example who gets what quality of service, depending on where 
they live in the city and their level of access), as well as technical solutions (the ways in which 
water and sanitation is provided and managed).49 
Like other sectors, WASH in cities presents particular challenges related to the scale, com-
plexity and interconnectedness of urban service systems. Issues to consider include:
•	
Deteriorating and aging infrastructure and service systems, including but not limi-
ted to water, wastewater, electricity and solid waste management.
•	
Dilapidated buildings requiring repair and maintenance of water and sanitation 
systems. These strucures may be several storeys high, including residential buildings, 
hospitals and schools.
•	
Different types of ownership (private and/or public), operation and maintenance of 
municipal water and sewerage services.
•	
Private sector service providers such as pit latrine emptiers that operate on a small 
scale but play an essential role in cities (particularly in low-income areas).
•	
The wide range of urban WASH needs and issues, from the use of water-borne sewage 
systems to cesspits and pit latrines in informal settlements. 
•	
People living in informal settlements may rely on water pumps and/or water vendors 
(public or private, formal or informal) for their water supply.
•	
Sanitation conditions in informal settlements can be extremely poor, affecting
health, protection concerns and dignity, for instance in relation to menstrual 
hygiene, and options for excreta disposal may be limited. 
A complex web of stakeholders are involved in WASH, each with their own aims, mandates 
and areas of expertise. All have shifting relationships with each other, and understanding 
this web of relationships is a crucial part of urban WASH programming. For a discussion 
of service providers, with examples from Lebanon and Jordan, see L. Diep et al., Water, 
49	  ALNAP and RedR UK, Urban WASH in Emergencies (London: ALNAP and RedR, 2014) (https://www.alnap.org/
system/files/content/resource/files/main/urban-wash-in-emergencies-v3.pdf).


===== PAGE 191 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    181
Crises and Conflict in MENA: How Can Water Service Providers Improve Their Resilience?, 
IIED Working Paper (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10846IIED).
4.4.2 WASH interventions 
During an acute emergency, humanitarian organisations may substitute for a service 
provider by installing tanks or bladders and initiating water trucking. In protracted 
settings, considerations include encouraging municipal authorities to cover the financing 
for the salaries of their staff, as well as funding for operations and maintenance, and 
mobilising the central government and possibly development actors (once the situation 
allows for their return) to actively commit to restoring services and helping the utility move 
towards financial stability. Support to service providers typically aims to help them meet 
their responsibility to operate, maintain and repair the system. In these circumstances, 
humanitarian organisations have a role to play in providing spare parts and consumables, 
and sub-contracting out repairs and rehabilitation work to construction companies.
The long-term provision of basic water and sanitation services is the mandate of official 
service providers (public and/or private), not NGOs. Humanitarian responses must 
therefore clearly understand whether substituting for those service providers or support-
ing them is more appropriate. If the former is required, then there must be a clear strategy 
and roadmap for establishing (or re-establishing) a sustainable service, and when and how 
responsibilities will be transferred back to official service providers. Building the resilience 
of water and sanitation utilities through coordinating with and supporting local actors 
in the short term will better prepare them to adapt and serve urban populations during 
future humanitarian crises.
In contexts of displacement, UNHCR states that ‘WASH interventions in urban areas aim to 
provide refugees [and IDPs] with safe access to water of sufficient quality and quantity, 
and good quality sanitation; to improve hygiene practices; and improve WASH in hospitals, 
health and nutrition centres, schools and other institutions, in order to achieve the same 
quality of services as host communities and ultimately reach national WASH service 
standards’.50 To that end, UNHCR identifies the following key activities: 
•	
Assess gaps and needs in WASH infrastructure.
•	
Constantly monitor WASH needs and changes in needs.
•	
Work closely and coordinate with government ministries, water providers, 
municipalities and other actors (such as UN agencies and donors), noting that ‘The 
best outcome is to provide urban refugees with full access to national services’.
50	  UNHCR, Emergency Handbook: WASH in Urban Areas, undated (https://emergency.unhcr.org/entry/112697/wash-in-
urban-areas).


===== PAGE 192 =====
182    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
UNHCR also notes that water needs paying for. For those unable to afford this, cash 
grants are an option. State-supplied water is almost always cheaper than bottled 
water or water supplied by vendors. 
Further guidance on WASH and urban refugees can be found in UNHCR’s online Emergency 
Handbook: WASH in Urban Areas, undated (https://emergency.unhcr.org/entry/112697/
wash-in-urban-areas). See also ICRC, Displaced in Cities: Experiencing and Responding to 
Urban Internal Displacement Outside Camps (Geneva: ICRC, 2018) (https://www.icrc.org/
en/publication/4344-displaced-cities-experiencing-and-responding-urban-internal-
displacement-outside).
4.4.3 Water 
Water here means ground water, water treatment and testing, surface water, desalinated 
water, collected rainwater and water supply (water supply is any water that is intended for 
consumption, hygiene and industrial use). Typical stages from source to consumer include 
production, treatment, transmission, storage and distribution. Issues concerning urban 
water delivery include:51
•	
Water delivery ranges from piped water supply in wealthier parts of the city to 
water points (such as wells and boreholes) and vendors selling water in informal 
settlements. Humanitarian interventions in an emergency, where water supply is 
disrupted, should ensure that they do not distort the long-term market for formal 
water supply.
•	
Water systems need technical know-how to work. This may be in short supply 
immediately after a disaster, and restoring water systems may take time. Effort is 
required to support local engineers (often including employees from the water and 
wastewater service provider/utility) and other technical specialists.
•	
Water quality can be an issue at any step from source through to consumption, 
and hence needs to be factored in from production to treatment, transmission, 
storage and distribution. Household-level treatment may need to be considered in 
some cases.
•	
There may be issues regarding legal constraints around providing permanent water 
supply to temporary shelters.
•	
The provision of drinking water using disposable plastic bottles can create a solid 
waste management concern. Currently there is little recognition of or responsibility 
for addressing this issue among implementing agencies.
51	  ALNAP and RedR UK, Urban WASH in Emergencies.


===== PAGE 193 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    183
•	
Wastewater can be a problem. The focus in areas where there is a wastewater 
collection and treatment system is to ensure that the network remains intact and 
that lifting stations continue to function properly so that wastewater is safely 
evacuated from a built-up, populated area. 
•	
Sewage systems that utilise wastewater collection and treatment systems can be 
a significant problem. In urban settings, humanitarian actors often focus on water 
supply and leave wastewater as a distant priority. In Aleppo during the Syrian 
conflict, the wastewater treatment plant was damaged and looted to the extent that 
there was nothing humanitarian organisations supporting the local service provider 
could do to bring it back online.52 This can pose a health risk for the population, for 
the general environment and for groundwater.
In repairing water systems, agencies need to identify where their best efforts lie. This almost 
certainly involves partnering with the private sector and/or public sector institutions (see the 
example from Gaza in Box 4.11). It also means advocating for supply to reach less developed 
parts of the city, so that repairs do not focus only on wealthier areas or areas experiencing 
rapid influxes of IDPs and refugees. The repair of city water supplies provides an important 
advocacy opportunity for extending the reach of water supply to poorer settlements, and 
relief activities can be complemented by work to strengthen the preparedness and capacity 
of official service providers to respond to crises in the future.
For examples of public/private sector water supply reconstruction initiatives, see ALNAP and 
RedR UK, Urban WASH in Emergencies (London: ALNAP and RedR, 2014) (https://www.alnap.
org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/urban-wash-in-emergencies-v3.pdf).
52	  Michael Talhami, ICRC, personal correspondence, February 2019.
Box 4.11  Wastewater evacuation in Gaza   
‘In 2014, the hostilities in the Gaza Strip at times required urgent action to ensure the safe 
evacuation of wastewater from built-up areas. In coordination with the Coastal Municipal 
Water Utility (CMWU), the ICRC supported the repair of wastewater infrastructure that was 
damaged. These actions included repairs successfully carried out on a sewage pumping 
station, a wastewater treatment plant, sections of the network, both inlet and outlet pipes 
to lagoons, as well as an effluent pressure pipeline. These quick repairs carried out by a 
construction contractor helped to prevent untreated wastewater from flooding into the 
streets and nearby homes, seeping into the aquifer, or flowing off to the sea. Ultimately, 
these actions aim to safeguard public health’.
See also ICRC, ‘Rafah Wastewater Treatment Plant’, undated (https://www.icrc.org/en/doc/assets/files/2011/rafah-
wastewater-treatment-plant-2011.pdf).


===== PAGE 194 =====
184    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
4.4.4 Water in protracted conflict situations
In protracted conflict settings, one aim is to reduce the rate of service decline, such as 
water supply, to avert a public health crisis and mitigate displacement (or at least that 
displacement that is in part caused by a lack of access to essential services). For example, 
programmes may seek to ensure that municipal service providers have the spare parts and 
consumables they need, which year after year is logistically heavy in protracted settings 
(for instance, consumables for water treatment such as aluminium sulphate, sodium 
hypochlorite and silica sand). 
Repair and rehabilitation work can continue during active conflict. For example, in 
coordination with the local service provider, ICRC arranged for a construction company to 
carry out repairs to the main water transmission pipeline to the Syrian city of Hama, home to 
1.3 million people. While the assessment and repairs took a week, negotiation to ensure safe 
access took three. In the words of one ICRC water specialist, ‘we often say that emergency 
response is less about the technical side and the ability of the contractors to perform the 
work, and more about the politics and negotiations that are necessary to ensure that you 
have safe access’.53
For further discussion of ICRC’s experience of water services in conflict settings, see 
Bled Dry: How War in the Middle East Is Bringing the Region’s Water Supplies to Breaking 
Point (Geneva: ICRC, 2015) (https://app.icrc.org/app/water-in-middle-east/PDF/full_
report-water-middle-east-icrc.pdf).
For more information on improving the resilience of water service providers in the Middle 
East, see Diep et al., Water, Crises and Conflict in MENA.
4.4.5 Sanitation 
Sanitation here refers to ‘the provision of facilities and services for the safe management 
of human excreta from the toilet to containment and storage and treatment onsite or 
conveyance, treatment and eventual safe end use or disposal’.54 Typical stages from 
household sources (toilets, and potentially including grey water from sinks and drains 
at household level if there is no storm water system in place) to treatment and potential 
reuse include collection, transmission, treatment and discharge. Sanitation in urban areas 
is varied, ranging from the use of water-borne sewage systems to cesspits, latrines and open 
defecation. In long-term emergencies, access to quality services may be diminished, while 
people caught up in rapid-onset disasters may find themselves without access to sanitation 
(see Section 4.8 on health). 
53	  ICRC, Urban Services in Protracted Armed Conflict (Geneva: ICRC, 2015) (https://www.icrc.org/sites/default/files/
topic/file_plus_list/4249_urban_services_during_protracted_armed_conflict.pdf), p. 30.
54	  WHO, ‘Sanitation’ (https://www.who.int/topics/sanitation/en/).


===== PAGE 195 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    185
One review of practice notes that ‘Safe excreta disposal is particularly difficult in an urban 
context. Issues of access for sludge removal and land availability for disposal can be 
especially challenging and need to be given immediate priority’.55 For example, following 
the 2010 earthquake in Haiti ‘excreta disposal was a major problem. Pit latrines and elevated 
latrines (both used as rudimentary cesspits) and portable toilets were used but desludging 
proved difficult because of the limited number of desludging vehicles, traffic congestion, 
and the cost’.56 A DFID evidence review paper found that ‘There is good evidence that for 
urban on-site sanitation systems to be effective they must allow for pit-emptying, or at least 
replacement of the pit, and the safe disposal of the pit contents where necessary’.57 
Another review of good practice in urban sanitation in emergencies found the following:
•	
‘WASH interventions should prioritise both the immediate collection of human waste 
and identification of final locations of disposal
•	
During flooding, agencies should also prioritise the prevention of the overflow of raw 
sewage from pits, septic tanks and water borne sewage networks 
55	  ALNAP and RedR UK, Urban WASH in Emergencies.
56	  J. Cocking and A. Bastable, ‘Water, Sanitation and Public Health in Post-earthquake Haiti: Reflections on Oxfam’s 
Experience’, Humanitarian Exchange 48, 2010, p. 21.
57	  DFID, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Evidence Paper, 2013 (https://www.humanitarianlibrary.org/resource/water-
sanitation-and-hygiene-evidence-paper-0), p. 10.
Box 4.12  Sanitation and a cholera outbreak in Zambia   
A prolonged cholera outbreak in Lusaka, Zambia, from December 2017 to March 2018 
originated in peri-urban areas of the city, where many residents access water using 
unregulated boreholes or shallow wells located close to poorly constructed pit latrines 
that leach their contents into a high water table. The response to the outbreak included 
public and private sector service providers. For example, the Lusaka Water and Sewerage 
Company (LWSC) identified the pit latrines that were in danger of flooding in two peri-
urban areas, and subsidised existing faecal sludge management (FSM) businesses, within 
community-based WASH organisations known as Water Trusts, to empty them safely. The 
outbreak did not lead to private sanitation service providers curtailing their operations 
to the same extent as during previous outbreaks, and encouraged greater engagement 
of public stakeholders such as Lusaka City Council and LWSC with FSM and sanitation 
provision in lower-income areas of the city. Post-payment for pit emptying services 
continued throughout, albeit at subsidised prices.  
Source:  Rosie Renouf and Claire Grissafi, Water & Sanitation for the Urban Poor (WSUP), February 2019.


===== PAGE 196 =====
186    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
For excreta disposal, digging pits may not be feasible, given space, legal and ground 
constraints 
•	
Where pits are used, the building of urinals and urine diversion toilets is good 
practice to reduce pit-filling times. Other options include building raised latrines 
(used for example by Oxfam in Haiti after the 2010 earthquake) on sites where space 
was limited, digging was impossible or landowners refused permission to dig. Other 
useful approaches include compost toilets, biodegradable bags and urine diversion 
toilets (where biodegradable bags are used, it is important to put an organised 
collection system in place) 
•	
Chemical toilets have a high maintenance cost and limited storage capacity. They 
may also be in short supply following an emergency 
•	
Final disposal of faecal matter can be a difficult and contentious issue. Environ-
mentally suitable locations should be identified as part of government contingency 
planning. Where this has not been done, agencies should prioritise identification of 
suitable locations 
•	
For recovery actions, agencies need to work closely with water and sanitation/ 
sewage departments, but with adequate agency coordination (through the WASH 
cluster or similar)
•	
Care should be taken concerning permanent system repair, which may be outside the 
scope and experience of agencies and which may also inadvertently not be focusing 
on more vulnerable locations such as informal settlements which usually have no 
such facilities’.58
Protection concerns in relation to sanitation are also an issue. WHO’s 2018 guidelines on 
sanitation and health note that ‘Public and shared sanitation in urban settlements has been 
linked to stress from lack of cleanliness, anxiety and withholding relief due to long lines, 
women’s and girls’ fear of harassment from men and boys, and lack of privacy or safety’.59 
Protection is discussed further in Section 4.7.
4.4.6 Hygiene
Hygiene here refers primarily to community engagement and participation, hygiene kit distri-
bution and health data monitoring, as well as information, education and communication (IEC) 
to promote behaviour change. A review of good practice regarding urban hygiene found that:
58	  D. Sanderson and P. Knox Clarke, Responding to Urban Disasters: Learning from Previous Relief and Recovery 
Operations (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2012) (http://www.urban-response.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/
alnap-lessons-urban-web.pdf), p. 14.
59	  WHO, Guidelines on Sanitation and Health (Geneva: WHO, 2018) (https://www.humanitarianlibrary.org/sites/
default/files/2018/12/9789241514705-eng.pdf), p. 13.


===== PAGE 197 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    187
‘In Haiti following the 2010 earthquake, Oxfam disseminated hygiene messages through 
mothers’ clubs, schools and children’s clubs, as well as household visits and poster 
campaigns. Social media and mobile phones were also used.
A simpler but still effective way of encouraging people to use sanitation facilities is to ensure 
that they are clean and well maintained, either by the community or by paid attendants. 
These attendants can also communicate hygiene messages.
Good hygiene practices in dense urban areas are critical to reduce disease incidences. Oxfam 
identifies first-response activities in dense areas as the minimising of high-risk practices 
such as indiscriminate open defecation, “flying toilets” (where excreta are thrown into public 
spaces in plastic bags) and the reduction of transmission of faecal–oral disease’.60 
In addition: 
Concerning urban hygiene promotion, community consultation is key, which can be 
challenging in cities, where people have a wide range of social, economic and cultural 
backgrounds, making it difficult to tailor specific messages. 
In relation to vector control, people affected by emergencies and conflicts are vulnerable 
to vector-borne diseases through greater exposure to bites and contact through poor 
shelter, lack of sanitation, stagnant water and poor nutrition, and by injuries that can 
become infected. In Syria, a reported increase of Leishmaniasis was caused by sand flies 
in building debris.61 
4.4.7 Cash and WASH
As with other sectors, the use of cash in relation to WASH is increasingly resonating in urban 
emergencies. This reflects in part a wider recognition that WASH actors may need to take on 
more of an enabling approach than a provider role given the complexity of cities and of urban 
response.62  A 2016 Global WASH Cluster position paper on cash and markets concluded 
that cash ‘may be effective in overcoming financial barriers to accessing WASH goods and 
services when combined with complementary approaches in contexts with an enabling 
environment’.63 
60	  Sanderson and Knox Clarke, Responding to Urban Disasters, p. 15.
61	  See WHO, ‘Danger in the Rubble: Fighting Leishmaniasis in Syria’, 23 October 2017 (http://www.emro.who.int/syr/
syria-news/danger-in-the-rubble-fighting-leishmaniasis-in-syria.html).
62	  ALNAP and RedR UK, Urban WASH in Emergencies, p. 14.
63	  WASH Cluster, Cash and Markets in the WASH Sector, 2016 (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/
files/main/gwc-cash-and-markets-position-paper-dec-2016.pdf), p. 1.


===== PAGE 198 =====
188    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Box 4.13 Refugee water access in Jordan
‘An integrated needs assessment carried out by Oxfam GB in March 2013 found that, while 
the majority of refugees in host communities can access water through the municipal 
supply system, the cheapest source of water, this is intermittent and unreliable, and many 
are forced to buy water from private vendors in order to meet their needs.
‘To develop [a further] understanding a market assessment was undertaken in 
Oxfam’s operational areas (the urban areas of Balqa and Zarqa Governorates, and in 
the informal tented settlements around factories and agricultural land) based on the 
Emergency Market Mapping and Analysis (EMMA) approach [see Section 3.3].
‘Given the deficiencies of the municipal supply, private wells are a critical part of the 
water market system. These wells, which are privately owned and operated, sell water 
to the Water Authority, to supplement supplies in the piped network, and to businesses, 
water transporters (water trucks) and individual households.
‘Refugees may often not have access to truck operators, and rely on their neighbours 
and landlords to make contact with them … Refugees with limited contact with their 
neighbours struggle to set up these types of arrangements. Even if these households 
manage to access truck operators, they may not have the capacity to store all the water 
that they have paid for.
‘In summary, the market assessment established that access to water for poor 
households (in particular refugees) is primarily determined by purchasing power 
and the availability of adequate water storage capacity within the household. More 
fragmented social connections also restrict access to the water trucking market.’
The market analysis enabled a range of response options for immediate implementation. 
‘As a result of the analysis the following activities were identified:
•	
‘Increasing access to drinking water through water vouchers linked to local water 
vendors: Water vouchers (commodity vouchers) for bottled drinking water are 
distributed to beneficiaries, to be redeemed from contracted vendors.
•	
‘Increase access to drinking water by providing household water filters: The 
distribution of water filters to individual households is a viable solution. Filters are 
available on the local market, and beneficiaries have requested them.
•	
‘Increase households’ water storage capacity: The extra [piped] water … allows 
all users to fill a minimum [water storage] tank … and so the aim is to increase the 
storage capacity of households possessing less than this.


===== PAGE 199 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    189
Box 4.13 (continued)
‘The market assessment confirmed that, for the urban areas of Balqa and Zarqa, the market 
system is vital for water access. In water-scarce and densely populated areas such as these 
there are few viable options for WASH programming. Critically, the market assessment was 
able to analyse the functionality, capacity and scope for expansion of the market system, 
making possible a range of short- and longer-term responses to help refugees to access water 
in an equitable manner and at a fair price, without stretching the market beyond its capacity.’
For the full article, see T. Wildman and C Brady, ‘Can Jordan’s Water Market Support the 
Syrian Refugee Influx?’, Humanitarian Exchange 59, November 2013 (https://odihpn.org/
magazine/can-jordan%C2%92s-water-market-support-the-syrian-refugee-influx/).
Country
Benefits of CBI over hygiene kits
Jordan
•     Freedom of choice to refugees in selecting which items they need.
•      More convenient than queuing to receive NFIs.
•      Satisfaction levels amongst beneficiaries were much higher.
•      Saved time for the team and therefore more cost effective than 
        providing the kits directly.
•      Increased monthly revenues of traders by 8,000 JOD (11,000 USD).
•      Helped integration of refugees in the host community, as they were 
        contributing to the local economy.
Haiti
•      Freedom of choice to IDPs in selecting which items they need.
•      Reduced security risks associated with mass distibutions.
Table 4.3 Comparing cash and hygiene kits in Jordan and Haiti
Source: UNHCR, Cash Based Interventions for WASH Programmes in Refugee Settings, undated, p. 9.
A review by UNHCR of cash programmes in refugee situations in 23 countries found that cash 
‘can successfully support activities aiming to improve sanitation at the household level’.64 
Cash-based interventions ‘have mostly been used to increase access to drinking water through 
a variety of water vendors, as well as to improve access to kits for water storage and treatment, 
repair and recover the piped water network and ensure maintenance of water supply’.65 
64	  UNHCR, Cash Based Interventions for WASH Programmes in Refugee Settings, undated (http://www.unhcr.
org/59fc35bd7.pdf), p. 9.
65	  Ibid., p. 6.


===== PAGE 200 =====
190    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Table 4.3 shows some of the benefits of cash-based interventions over hygiene kits in urban 
areas of Jordan and Haiti. The same review identified the following lessons in enacting cash 
in WASH interventions:
•	
Understanding WASH market systems is important for programme effectiveness.
•	
Cash can help market actors overcome supply-side barriers in WASH markets.
•	
The perceived risks of cash in relation to vouchers are not backed up by evidence (for 
instance that cash may be used for non-WASH activities).
•	
Cash can complement rather than replace other forms of support, such as technical 
assistance.
As in other sectors, cash works only where markets are functioning, which in turn requires 
market analysis. Figure 4.2, from the UNHCR study cited above, illustrates some of the key 
considerations when using cash in WASH. In summary, WASH is a vast area, including a wide 
range of actors, as well as expensive infrastructure. What actions an agency takes depends 
largely on its mandate, on whether engagement is short-, medium- or long-term, and to what 
degree efforts are intended to address systemic problems as well as immediate needs.  
Large-scale infrastructure reconstruction efforts fall outside of the mandate, budget and 
capacity of humanitarian actors. However, the repair and rehabilitation of specific assets 
within a system may not. In protracted crises, a key activity is to ensure that systems do not 
fail. While there is a sense of urgency to address immediate needs such as the destruction of 
or damage to infrastructure, addressing underlying needs such as a lack of proper operation 
and maintenance is more difficult because it requires a preventative maintenance approach. 
Useful resources   
‘ICRC, Protracted Conflict and Humanitarian Action: Some Recent ICRC Experiences (Geneva: 
ICRC, 2016) (https://www.icrc.org/sites/default/files/document/file_list/protracted_
conflict_and_humanitarian_action_icrc_report_lr_29.08.16.pdf).
The sustainable sanitation alliance (SuSanA) hosts a large library on urban sanitation: 
see https://www.susana.org/en/.
UNICEF’s online library of WASH-related issues can be found at https://www.unicef.org/
wash/3942_documents.html.
Sanivation focuses on WASH issues in East Africa: see http://www.sanivation.com/.
See also the WASH Innovation Catalogue (2019) from the Humanitarian Innovation 
FUND (HIF): https://www.elrha.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/HIF-WASH-innovation-
catalogue-WEB_9.5MB.pdf.


===== PAGE 201 =====
Sectoral responses    |    191
Chapter 4
Inclusion    |    191
Figure 4.2 Key considerations when using cash in WASH
Source: UNHCR, Cash Based Interventions for WASH Programmes in Refugee Settings, p. 20.
•	 Understand who does not have access to 
water and why.
•	 Understand who is not using good 
sanitation or hygiene practices and why, 
to decide the appropriate response. KAP 
surveys are useful.
•	 Interview women and people with 
specific needs to understand their 
preferences for sanitation and hygiene 
items, if these items can be found on the 
local market, or if they prefer in-kind 
assistance.
•	 What markets require special 
assessment tools. Assess 
water quality of local 
sources and providers.
•	 Monitor prices and supply 
of basic WASH items, 
water, etc.
•	 Monitor water quality both at 
point of sale/exchange and at 
household level.
•	 CBIs to increase access to WASH 
goods and services (water, sanitation 
and hygiene kits, household water 
treatment, materials for WASH 
infrastructure, etc.).
•	  Employment schemes or incentives can 
be used to rehabilitate water storage 
facilities, or construct latrines.
•	 Temporary measure such as water 
vouchers in lieu of water trucking, until 
a more sustainable source of water 
can be found.
•	 Focus group discussions with women 
to determine appropriate WASH items 
and establish adequate voucher or cash 
transfer value.
•	 Employment schemes for sanitary 
and waste disposal (e.g. latrines, 
environmental management for vector 
control) must be accompanied by 
technical advice and support.
•	 Complementary programmes such as 
IEC on WASH are essential where KAP 
surveys reveal a need.
•	 Shortages and price inflation can be 
mitigated by supply-side interventions 
(e.g. rehabilitaing public water sources, 
and unconditional grants reducing the 
demand on single items).
•	 SMS messaging with WASH messages.
Set objectives
Plan and 
design
Monitor and 
learn
Assess and 
analyse 
response 
options
•	 For water vouchers, contact 
vendors who meet quality 
standards and a capacity 
assessment.


===== PAGE 202 =====
192    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
4.5 Livelihoods
Cities are home to a wide range of income-earning opportunities, both formal and informal. 
Re-establishing livelihoods after a disaster as quickly as possible, and supporting livelihood 
opportunities for refugees and IDPs, are vital activities. 
Livelihoods links with other sections in this Good Practice Review, in particular cash and 
markets (Section 3.3) and assessments (Section 3.6). It also links to protection, where some 
livelihood activities may be risky to those engaging in them, or where people may be unable 
to undertake livelihood activities due to age or infirmity (see Section 1.4 on vulnerability).
This section defines livelihoods.66 It discusses livelihoods programming after rapid-onset 
disasters. For refugee settings it identifies challenges to and opportunities for effective pro-
gramming. The section ends with points for engaging refugees in livelihoods opportunities. 
4.5.1 Defining livelihoods 
Livelihoods projects in emergency contexts ‘aim to preserve and restore the income-earning 
opportunities of affected communities while stimulating economic recovery’.67 Livelihoods 
programming can account for a large portion of post-disaster recovery expenditure.68 In 
urban areas, and in particular in relation to refugees and their access to jobs, this definition 
can be expanded to include the need to influence the policy environment in which livelihoods 
can be secured (this is discussed further below). 
Following rapid-onset disasters, livelihood programmes can aid recovery and help improve 
opportunities for poorer and more vulnerable people, for instance through providing 
certified skills training (see the case study in Box 4.14). For protracted displacement 
situations, livelihoods programming is vital. Refugees and IDPs with little if any savings or 
remittances or insufficient access to employment are particularly vulnerable, and risk falling 
into deeper debt. A study of Syrian refugees living in Lebanon69 found that almost 90% of 
households surveyed were in debt in 2015, compared to 81% in 2014. Building livelihoods 
66	  Livelihoods here refers to income-earning opportunities, rather than ‘sustainable livelihoods’ as used within 
developmental thinking. 
67	  CRS, Guidance on Livelihoods Programming in Emergency Response and Recovery Contexts (Baltimore, MD: Catholic 
Relief Services, 2018), p. 1.
68	  For example, expenditure on livelihoods programmes from the Disasters Emergency Committee among its 13 
operational NGO members in the 2015 Haiti earthquakes accounted for 31% of total expenditure for recovery funding, 
second only to shelter. 
69	  UNCHR, UNICEF and WFP, Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees in Lebanon – 2015 Report, cited in IRC, 
Finding Economic Opportunity in the City: Lessons from IRC’s Cash and Livelihoods Programmes in Cities within Lebanon 
and Jordan (New York: IRC, 2016) (https://www.rescue.org/report/finding-economic-opportunity-city), p. 12.


===== PAGE 203 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    193
therefore presents opportunities to reduce dependency, and to tap into the varied resources 
and opportunities available within cities.
4.5.2 Livelihoods in post-disaster settings
One of the IASC’s strategic objectives in urban post-disaster recovery is: ‘Restore Livelihoods 
and Economic Opportunities as a Priority, starting in the Emergency Phase for Expedited 
Early Recovery in Urban Areas’.70 According to the IASC, livelihood restoration in response 
strategies can be strengthened by:
•	
Linking livelihoods to shelter reconstruction, including training people in relevant 
skills (see Box 4.14).
•	
Engaging with supply chains, distribution systems and markets (see Section 3.3 on 
cash and markets). 
•	
Providing support to local suppliers and contractors. 
•	
Enacting protection approaches that tackle extortion and other corrupt practices.  
70	  IASC, Final Strategy for Meeting Humanitarian Challenges in Urban Areas, 2010 (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/
iasc-strategy-meeting-humanitarian-challenges-in-urban-areas).
Box 4.14  Post-disaster recovery skills training programmes
NGOs and others have implemented training programmes in a number of post-
disaster recovery operations. Following Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines in 
2013, UNDP supported training in masonry, plumbing and carpentry as part of 
an accredited programme, Skills Training for Early Recovery and Reconstruction 
(STERR). In the 2005 earthquake response in Pakistan, Church World Service Pakistan/
Afghanistan supported a programme of training for men in carpentry, plumbing, 
electrics, masonry and welding. At the end of the 40-day programme, trainees 
sat an exam. Those who passed were recognised as suitably qualified and were 
subsequently hired by local employers. An independent review of the programme 
found that ‘The trainings helped in enhancing the income of graduates substantially 
and have been instrumental in establishing a sustainable source of livelihood for the 
beneficiaries. Most importantly, the training programmes instil skills that will remain 
with the trainees for life’.
Sources: D. Sanderson and Z. Delica Willisen, Philippines Typhoon Haiyan Response Review, 2014 (https://www.alnap.
org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/dec-hc-haiyan-review-report-2014.pdf), p. 4; and A. Hasan et al., ASPK-
61 Appeal Earthquake Recovery and Rehabilitation – Pakistan. Evaluation (Geneva: ACT Alliance, 2009), p. 55.
•	
Engaging younger people in particular (see the case study example from Ethiopia 
in Box 4.16).


===== PAGE 204 =====
194    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Key considerations in programming for livelihoods recovery include:71 
•	
First, distinguish between basic needs and livelihoods promotion – after immediate 
relief needs, more detailed assessments may be required to understand and support 
different livelihood options, the market, skills, etc. Adequate assessments are critical 
to avoid people being forced into livelihoods they may have little interest in, and 
also address gendered views of livelihoods (for instance that women should learn 
basket-weaving). 
•	
Second, be timely in implementing programmes – given the fast-changing nature 
of urban environments, the time between assessment and implementation needs 
to be short. 
•	
Third, strong partnerships with city authorities can help ensure that activities 
become established and are in line with existing policies and laws. 
•	
Finally, link relief and recovery actions with longer-term development programmes, 
where they exist. 
4.5.3 Refugee livelihoods 
The key finding of a wide-ranging study of urban refugees across eight countries is that ‘A 
common thread weaves the argument that urban refugees could be highly beneficial to cities 
if they were allowed to pursue productive lives absent of legal restrictions, harassment and 
insecurity’.72 It is unsurprising that, globally, the majority of refugees choose to live in cities. 
This is in no small part due to the livelihood opportunities they offer. Research by UNHCR in 
a number of countries73 concluded that most refugees of working age are either employed or 
self-employed, in both the formal and informal economy. That said, livelihood opportunities 
for urban refugees face a number of challenges, including:
Prevention of the right to work. Many refugees are refused the right to work in their host 
countries, closing off opportunities to engage in society, pay taxes and enjoy various forms 
of insurance. Skilled and experienced people who find themselves as refugees are prevented 
from formally applying for positions that match their vocation or expertise.
Precarious existence in the informal economy. Many refugees have no other option but to work 
in the informal sector. This in many ways is a benefit (at least as against having no work at all) 
71	  This discussion is based on the British Red Cross’s experiences in urban livelihood recovery in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
72	  K. Jacobsen, ‘Refugees and Asylum Seekers in Urban Areas: A Livelihoods Perspective’, Journal of Refugee Studies, 
19(3), 2006, p. 1. 
73	  UNHCR, Designing Appropriate Interventions in Urban Settings: Health, Education, Livelihoods, and Registration for 
Urban Refugees and Returnees (Geneva: UNHCR, 2009). Note this research took place before the Syrian crisis.


===== PAGE 205 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    195
and has been the mainstay of millions of urban dwellers for decades. However, the informal 
economy does not bring the benefits usually associated with formal employment, such as 
social security, health and safety and fair employment practices. 
Refugees may have little or no documentation to prove they are qualified in a certain 
profession. They may also lack the funds to begin an enterprise or establish a livelihoods 
activity. They almost certainly lack (in the initial stages at least) the social capital to link with 
existing employment activities. Refugees may also be from a rural background, and may 
have to re-train to be relevant to the urban labour market.
Exploitation risks. Refugees working in the informal sector may be exploited, for instance 
being paid less than locals. In Lebanon, this has increased tensions between displaced and 
host communities living in often impoverished urban areas. Here, host communities perceive 
the lower salaries as an unfair form of competition. Some refugees may also have no choice 
other than to work in illegal or risky areas, such as commercial sex or child labour. 
For further examples of livelihoods and refugees, drawing on case studies from Khartoum, 
Nairobi, Yei, Juba, Kabul and Nairobi, see S. Haysom, Sanctuary in the City?  Urban 
Displacement and Vulnerability, HPG Report (London: ODI, 2013) (https://www.odi.org/sites/
odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/8444.pdf). 
4.5.4 Opportunities for urban refugee livelihood programming74
Interventions related to urban refugee livelihoods include:
•	
Offer legal services – this is a critical area of work, providing assistance for example in 
preventing unfair evictions (see Section 4.1 on HLP rights). 
•	
Provide information on work permits and business registration. This links to 
employment support and career guidance (see the examples in Boxes 4.15 and 4.16 
from Lebanon and Ethiopia).
•	
Link refugees to vocational training schemes – preferably certified. 
•	
Make links with existing employers (where formal refugee employment is permitted) 
and support job applications, such as help with formulating CVs.
•	
Provide help in accessing financial services. This may include raising awareness 
of loans offered at unaffordable interest rates, to help refugees avoid falling into 
unsustainable debt.  
74	  This section draws in particular on UNHCR, Designing Appropriate Interventions in Urban Settings; IRC, Finding 
Economic Opportunity in the City.


===== PAGE 206 =====
196    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Offer financial assistance, such as seed funding to set up income-generating 
enterprises.
•	
Make links with educational establishments and promote relevant courses.
4.5.5 Engaging refugees in livelihoods opportunities 
UNHCR observes that, ‘In urban settings, successful livelihood interventions result from 
a good understanding of the context, of the attitudes of potential beneficiaries and the 
capacity to identify existing services which can support refugees in the employment 
Box 4.15  Economic recovery and development in Lebanon
IRC’s Livelihoods Centres in Akkar and Mount Lebanon are open to both Syrians and 
Lebanese who need assistance in legal matters and finding employment. Assistance 
is provided in developing business plans and securing small start-up grants. At the 
centres, ‘job-seekers are able to take advantage of intensive counselling services, 
with some also receiving training in marketable skills and – within the constraints 
of the Lebanese labour regulations – opportunities for on-the-job learning/
apprenticeships and short-term cash-for-work projects’.
Box 4.16  Livelihood programming in Ethiopia
A livelihood programme for younger refugees and host populations in Dollo Ado 
and Shire in Ethiopia comprises basic literacy and numeracy skills and practical 
vocational training. The programme, implemented by NRC, undertakes market 
assessments to gauge the relevance of skills training. People on the scheme 
have been trained in a variety of skills, including plumbing, electronics and hotel 
management. An evaluation of the programme found that ‘refugees and host 
community members work together to maximise their income generating potential. 
For example, host community beneficiaries (who know the refugees from vocational 
training programmes) work with their refugee peers to help them purchase or sell 
goods on the market as well as to procure local host communities contracts’.
Source: IRC, Finding Economic Opportunity in the City: Lessons from IRC’s Cash and Livelihoods Programmes in Cities 
within Lebanon and Jordan (New York: IRC, 2016) (https://www.rescue.org/report/finding-economic-opportunity-city).
Source: Samuel Hall, Thinking Forward about Livelihoods for Refugees in Ethiopia – Learning from NRC’s programming 
2013–2016, 2016 (http://samuelhall.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Thinking-forward-about-Livelihoods-for-
Refugees-in-Ethiopia-FINAL-REPORT.pdf).


===== PAGE 207 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    197
ambitions’.75 Strategic interventions for engaging refugees in improved livelihoods 
opportunities include:
•	
Advocating for host governments to meet their international obligations to allow 
refugees to work, which should ‘foster an enabling environment for the economic 
empowerment and self-reliance of displaced populations’.76
•	
Recognising and capitalising on livelihoods efforts that build social cohesion. According 
to IRC, ‘Anecdotal evidence indicates that livelihoods programmes can enhance social 
cohesion between displaced and host communities to some degree. This goal should 
be considered a critical component of urban humanitarian response’.77
•	
A recognition of the need for long-term engagement by donors, agencies and others 
to provide support in establishing urban refugees in their chosen locations.
•	
In programme design, build in a diversity of approaches, such as combining 
livelihoods programming with cash transfers.
•	
Build relationships with all actors. IRC’s research on the livelihoods of refugees in 
Lebanon and Jordan78 found that effective collaboration with government (at different 
levels), the private sector, service providers and community-based organisations 
improved programme efficiency and effectiveness and helped make programmes 
more locally relevant.  
Further guidance and ideas can be found in Feinstein International Center, Refugee 
Livelihoods in Urban Areas: Identifying Program Opportunities, 2012 (https://www.alnap.org/
system/files/content/resource/files/main/adult-app-form-march-2012.pdf).
An inventory of toolkits and guidance notes can be found at ‘Livelihoods’ and ‘Emergency 
Livelihoods’, Humanitarian Response, 2018 (https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/
topics/environment/page/livelihoods; 
and 
https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/
operations/iraq/social-cohesion-and-sustainable-livelihoods).
The Secure Livelihoods Research Consortium (SLRC) ‘aims to strengthen the evidence base 
and inform policy and practice around livelihoods, basic services and social protection in 
conflict-affected situations’. See https://securelivelihoods.org/about-slrc/.
75	  UNHCR, ‘Livelihoods and Self Reliance in Urban Areas’ (https://emergency.unhcr.org/entry/125822/livelihoods-
and-self-reliance-in-urban-areas).
76	  UNHCR, Designing Appropriate Interventions in Urban Settings.
77	  IRC, Finding Economic Opportunity in the City, p. 22.
78	  Ibid.


===== PAGE 208 =====
198    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
See also:
Food Security and Livelihoods in Urban Settings Working Group. Food Security Cluster, 2018 
(http://fscluster.org/food-security-and-livelihoods-urban/workinggroup/food-security-
and-livelihoods-urban).
Livelihoods, IFRC, 2018 (https://www.ifrc.org/en/what-we-do/disaster-management/from-
crisis-to-recovery/what-is-a-livelihood/).
Guidelines for Integrating Gender-based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Action: 
Livelihoods, IASC, 2015 (https://gbvguidelines.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/TAG-
livelihood-08_26_2015.pdf).
4.6 Education
The Inter-agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE) defines education in emerg-
encies as ‘quality, inclusive learning opportunities for all ages in situations of crisis, including 
early childhood development, primary, secondary, non-formal, technical, vocational, 
higher and adult education. Education in emergencies provides physical, psychosocial, and 
cogn-itive protection that can sustain and save lives’.79 The need is substantial: the Global 
Education Cluster estimates that 58 million primary school age children and 20 million of 
secondary school age are currently out of education due to conflict.80 Girls in refugee 
situations are usually the worst affected.81 According to UNHCR estimates, only 50% of 
refugee children have access to primary education, and 22% secondary.82 In Lebanon, ‘more 
than half of [Syrian] refugee children in the age group 3–18 are still out of school, mainly 
adolescents and youth’.83
This Good Practice Review, while finding a large amount of information on education in 
conflict and emergencies,84 unearthed very little specifically directed at cities, or concerned 
79	  INEE, Strategic Framework, forthcoming, 2019. 
80	  UNESCO, Migration, Displacement and Education: Building Bridges, Not Walls, Global Education Monitoring Report 
(Paris: UNESCO, 2018) (https://en.unesco.org/gem-report/report/2019/migration).
81	  See for example UNHCR, Her Turn: It’s Time to Make Refugee Girls’ Education a Priority, UNHCR, 2019 
(https://www.unhcr.org/herturn/).
82	   UNHCR, Missing Out: Refugee Education in Crises (Geneva: UNHCR, 2016) (https://www.unhcr.org/missing-out-
state-of-education-for-the-worlds-refugees.html).
83	  UNHCR, ‘Education’ (https://www.unhcr.org/lb/education).
84	  See for example the INEE online toolkit (http://toolkit.ineesite.org/toolkit), which includes resources, information, 
the INEE Minimum Standards for Education and related materials on education in emergency programmes. 


===== PAGE 209 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    199
with naturally triggered disasters in urban areas. In fact, according to one study, currently 
‘no global policy instrument or document has carefully considered the unique educational 
needs of urban refugees’.85 That said, with the majority of IDPs and refugees living in urban 
areas, much of the good practice discussed in this section is relevant to urban areas. 
This section86 identifies good practice and challenges in protracted displacement settings. 
It discusses education in armed conflict settings. The section ends by identifying the need 
for psychosocial support (PSS) in education in emergencies. The section links with a number 
of others, in particular protection (Section 4.7), WASH (Section 4.4) and forced displacement 
(Section 1.3).
4.6.1 Good practice in displacement settings
Students who are refugees or internally displaced and live in urban environments need to 
be integrated into existing public systems of education, presenting numerous challenges 
relating to overcrowding, teacher shortages and discrimination.87 In situations of migration, 
existing services can quickly become overwhelmed. In Lebanon, for example, the govern-
ment has established a shift system in its largely urban public schools to accommodate 
nearly 500,000 Syrian refugee school-age children (this is further discussed in Box 4.17).88 
UNHCR’s advice on good practice in protracted displacement settings includes:
•	
Take a holistic approach – if building schools, coordinate this with infrastructure 
(such as water and sanitation), teacher training and the provision of materials.
•	
Provide and/or advocate for free primary education. 
•	
Do not set up parallel education structures.
•	
Lobby decision-makers to recognise foreign school certificates to enable refugee 
children and adolescents to enroll.
•	
Where possible set up support classes, for example for learning a new (local) language 
and remedial classes.
•	
Integrate interventions into existing education systems.
85	  M. Mendenhall, S. G. Russell and E. Buckner, Urban Refugee Education: Strengthening Policies and Practices for 
Access, Quality and Inclusion (New York: Columbia University, 2017) (https://www.tc.columbia.edu/media/centers/
refugee-education-research-and-projects/Urban-Refugees-Full-Report.pdf).
86	  This section benefited in particular from the inputs of Dr Francine Menashy, Associate Professor in the Department 
of Leadership in Education at the University of Massachusetts.
87	  UNICEF, State of the World’s Children 2012: Children in an Urban World (Geneva: UNICEF, 2012) (https://www.unicef.
org/sowc2012/), pp. 28–30.
88	  UNHCR, ‘Operational Portal: Syria Regional Refugee Response’ (https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situations/syria).


===== PAGE 210 =====
200    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Other elements of good practice include:
•	
‘Explore options for leveraging teaching expertise among refugee populations. 
Amidst the teacher shortages in many countries, including those affected by conflict 
and/or hosting refugees, national governments should be encouraged to find ways 
to identify and leverage teaching expertise among refugee populations … Recognize 
and strengthen teacher qualifications for integration, repatriation and resettlement.’
•	
Apply ‘psychosocial well-being approaches that teachers can use to both provide 
their learners with additional social-emotional support and help them identify when 
students might need help that exceeds teachers’ knowledge and abilities’.
•	
Apply ‘language teaching methods that allow teachers to support second language 
acquisition and learning among students entering a classroom with a new and 
unfamiliar language of instruction’.
•	
‘Provide opportunities for communities to stay apprised of and influence the policy 
making process, including establishing synergies between community-led efforts 
and formal education’.89
Coordination between sectors is crucial.90 UNHCR notes that ‘coordination between workers 
in the education, protection, shelter, water and sanitation, health and psychosocial sectors 
is important in establishing learner-friendly, safe spaces’.91 The case study on Syrian refugee 
children and education in Lebanon in Box 4.17 illustrates the importance of a coordinated 
response between agencies and government authorities. 
4.6.2 Challenges in protracted displacement settings
Challenges to accessing a quality education in protracted displacement contexts include:
•	
Public systems of education in cities may already be poorly resourced and struggle to 
provide quality education prior to the crisis.92
•	
Overcrowding in public schools due to absorption of refugee students.
•	
Lack of teachers, in numbers and also ability.
89	  Mendenhall, Russell and Buckner, Urban Refugee Education. See also M. Mendenhall, S. Gomez and E. Varni, 
‘Teaching Amidst Conflict and Displacement: Persistent Challenges and Promising Practices for Refugee, Internally 
Displaced and National Teachers’, paper commissioned for UNESCO, Migration, Displacement and Education. 
90	  See also the section on coordination in the INEE Minimum Standards, pp. 31–34.
91	  UNHCR, Designing Appropriate Interventions in Urban Settings: Health, Education, Livelihoods, and Registration for 
Urban Refugees and Returnees (Geneva: UNHCR, 2009) (https://www.unhcr.org/en-au/4b2789779.pdf).
92	  UNICEF, State of the World’s Children 2012.


===== PAGE 211 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    201
•	
Limited materials, such as books and stationery. 
•	
Monitoring and evaluation of refugee education may be difficult when children 
enrolled in schools are no longer identified as refugees.
•	
Costs for uniforms, materials and travel to and from school.
•	
Registration to attend school can be hampered by a lack of relevant documentation, 
such as IDs and past school certificates. 
Box 4.17  Coordinated efforts to support Syrian refugee children in 
Lebanon’s schools
In Lebanon, ‘more than 221,000 Syrian refugee children aged 3–18 years enrolled 
in both morning and afternoon shifts during the 2017/2018 school year (of which 71 
per cent in the latter shift). Around 57 per cent of refugee children in the age group 
6–14 are enrolled in public school. To accommodate this increase … [the Ministry of 
Education and Higher Education] MEHE initially opened 376 second shift schools, of 
which 350 schools remain open and at capacity.
‘UNHCR focuses on community interventions identifying out-of-school children and 
youth, providing counseling and awareness sessions and community-based solutions 
for those at risk of dropping out. It has set up support activities such as homework 
groups led by community volunteers, increased parental engagement through parent 
community groups, and assigned community volunteers to second shift schools to 
prevent violence and refer child protection cases and children at risk of dropping out 
to specialized agencies/services, aiming at increased school retention.
‘In 2017, UNHCR also started assessing MEHE schools for a rehabilitation and 
expansion project that will increase the capacity of approximately 24 schools during 
2018, and will ensure they are equipped to provide inclusive education also for 
children with disabilities. International funding covers both the rehabilitation and 
expansion of public schools and community retention activities.
‘The Education sector partners work closely together on the annual Back to School 
campaign. As the Ministry of Education started providing regulated non-formal 
education programmes targeting out-of-school children and youth as a way of (re)
integrating them in certified education, the Back to School (or Back to Learning) 
campaign is now continuously ongoing throughout the year. In addition to its 
community outreach, UNHCR uses targeted SMS and Whatsapp messages to spread 
information widely about available education programmes’.
Source: UNHCR, 2019, Education. See: https://www.unhcr.org/lb/education


===== PAGE 212 =====
202    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
•	
Discrimination and xenophobia in schools.93
•	
Language barriers.
•	
Refugee children may need psychosocial support (see below).94
•	
Costly and lengthy school reconstruction post-disaster.
•	
External pressures: school-age adolescents may also be household heads.
Education may not be an economic priority for struggling families. One report notes that:
Urban residents face a higher cost of living than those in camps or rural settings; they 
must rely on existing social services and make ends meet among limited livelihoods 
opportunities. For refugees who are struggling to provide basic needs for their families, 
it can prove difficult to prioritize education for their children, especially in the event that 
school and other fees are expected for enrollment and retention. Children may also 
be expected to work rather than attend school. 80% of survey respondents mentioned 
livelihoods as a barrier to education.95
Refugee communities sometimes start their own schools, but these are often unregulated 
and do not provide the recognised official diplomas required for access to higher education 
and the workforce.
4.6.3 Education in conflict 
School buildings, teachers and students can be deliberately targeted in conflict; UNESCO 
reports that ‘In several long-running conflicts, armed groups have used attacks on school 
children and teachers to “punish” participation in state institutions’.96 According to the Safe 
Schools Declaration, a ‘political instrument through which states acknowledge the full range 
of challenges facing education during armed conflict and make commitments to better 
protect students, staff, and educational facilities in war time’: 
In the majority of countries affected by conflict over the past decade, fighting forces have 
used schools and universities for military purposes, such as for bases, barracks, weapon 
93	  UNHCR, Missing Out.
94	  INEE, Guidance Note on Psychosocial Support: Facilitating Psychosocial Wellbeing and Social and Emotional Learning 
(New York: Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies, 2018) (http://s3.amazonaws.com/inee-assets/
resources/INEE_Guidance_Note_on_Psychosocial_Support_ENG_v2.pdf).
95	  Mendenhall, Russell and Buckner, Urban Refugee Education, p. 13. Emphasis in the original.
96	  UNESCO, The Hidden Crisis: Armed Conflict and Education. Education for All Global Monitoring Report (Paris: 
UNESCO, 2011) (https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000190743).


===== PAGE 213 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    203
stores, and detention facilities. This practice can convert educational facilities into military 
objectives, exposing students and staff to the potentially devastating consequences of 
attack. More generally, the presence of armed groups or armed forces in schools impairs 
efforts to ensure the continuation of education during war-time.97
Schools can also be closed for prolonged periods and require lengthy and costly reconstruction 
following disaster. 
For further information on the Declaration, including case study examples, see GCPEA, 
The Safe Schools Declaration: A Framework for Action (New York: Global Coalition to 
Prevent Education from Attack, 2015) (http://protectingeducation.org/sites/default/files/
documents/a_framework_for_action.pdf).
4.6.4 Psychosocial support in education in emergencies
The INEE advocates for the inclusion of PSS in education settings98 for the following reasons:
•	
‘Education can offer a stable routine and structure and support a sense of normality, 
all factors that can support children and youth in healing and developing resilience.
•	
Learning spaces provide opportunities for friendship, as well as peer and adult 
support. These interpersonal skills and relational supports are essential for a healthy 
social ecology, psychosocial wellbeing, and longer-term resilience.
•	
Learning spaces unite the wider community and strengthen the relational supports 
available for vulnerable children. Activities that engage parents, community leaders, 
and education authorities are critical in this regard and may also enhance social 
cohesion.
•	
Education settings are ideal for structured play activities that help children learn, 
recover from distressing experiences and develop social and emotional skills.
•	
Social-emotional learning supports the development of social and emotional 
competencies that strengthen academic performance and improve children’s ability 
to navigate adversity.’99
For further information see INEE, Guidance Note on Psychosocial Support: Facilitating 
Psychosocial Wellbeing and Social and Emotional Learning (New York: Inter-Agency Network 
97	  GCPEA, The Safe Schools Declaration: A Framework for Action (New York: Global Coalition to Prevent Education from 
Attack, 2015) (http://protectingeducation.org/sites/default/files/documents/a_framework_for_action.pdf), p. 9.
98	  INEE, Guidance Note on Psychosocial Support, p. 9.
99	  Ibid. 


===== PAGE 214 =====
204    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
for Education in Emergencies, 2018) (http://s3.amazonaws.com/inee-assets/resources/
INEE_Guidance_Note_on_Psychosocial_Support_ENG_v2.pdf). See also the INEE toolkit 
on 
psychosocial 
support 
at 
https://toolkit.ineesite.org/inee_minimum_standards/
implementation_tools/%3Ch3%3Ekey_thematic_issues%3Ch3%3E/psychosocial_support.
4.7 Protection
Protection involves efforts to ensure that people caught up in disasters, conflict or 
violence, or who have been forcibly displaced, are safe and are offered the full protection 
of human rights. 
This section defines protection. It discusses protection in naturally-triggered disasters and 
protection and forced displacement. It presents protection and urban warfare and protection 
and urban violence. The section identifies protection and particular groups, including children, 
women, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ+) people and people living with 
disabilities. It also discusses mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS). 
Protection is an enormous subject, cutting across all sectors. As such, this section relates 
closely to a number of others in this Good Practice Review, including violence, conflict, 
vulnerability, education, health and HLP rights.
Useful resources
IINEE thematic areas: https://www.ineesite.org/en/eie-thematic-areas.
IASC Education Cluster: https://www.ineesite.org/en/partnerships/education-cluster.
INEE and the IASC Education Cluster training and capacity development materials: 
http://www.ineesite.org/en/training-capacity-development.
INEE, Training Pack for Primary School Teachers in Crisis Contexts: http://www.
ineesite.org/en/training-pack-for-primary-school-teachers-in-crisis-contexts.
UNESCO, Migration, Displacement and Education: Building Bridges, Not Walls, Global 
Education Monitoring Report (Paris: UNESCO, 2018) (https://en.unesco.org/gem-
report/report/2019/migration).


===== PAGE 215 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    205
4.7.1 Defining protection 
Protection can be defined as ‘all activities aimed at ensuring full respect for the rights of 
the individual in accordance with the letter and the spirit of the relevant bodies of law, 
i.e. human rights law, international humanitarian law and refugee law’.100 This definition, 
adopted by the ICRC, the IASC and a number of other agencies, explicitly ties protection into 
human rights and other bodies of law – protection is about securing human rights. A further, 
broader understanding, relating to protection in urban warfare, encompasses ‘immediate 
emergency activities pre- and post-bombing, as well as legal and human rights legislation 
and compliance’.101
All humanitarian interventions should undertake a protection risk analysis, including the 
following questions:
•	
What are the existing/potential protection risks?
•	
Who is vulnerable to those risks?
•	
What capacities exist to deal with those risks, including local strategies, institutions 
or mechanisms that could be used and/or strengthened by international humani-
tarian actors (to avoid duplication of existing activities/structures)?
•	
How do/could potential risks interact with the planned project (could the project 
increase risks? Could risks impact on the project?)
•	
What mitigation measures can be put in place (to be regularly reassessed)?
A number of protection assessment tools exist. ActionAid’s Safety with Dignity: A Field Manual 
for Integrating Community-based Protection across Humanitarian Programs can be found at 
https://drc.ngo/media/2113379/actionaid_safety-with-dignity.pdf.
The Global Protection Cluster provides extensive guidance on operationalising protec-
tion across programmes, for example relating to cash programming and IDP 
protection. Issues include accountability, safety and dignity, inclusion and access. See 
http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/tools-and-guidance/essential-protection-
guidance-and-tools/cash-based-interventions-and-idp-protection/.
For protection measures to work in urban areas – and as with almost certainly every other 
sectoral response – activities need to be cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary, with local 
100	 S. Giossi Caverzasio, Strengthening Protection in War: A Search for Professional Standards (Geneva: ICRC, 2001), 
quoted in H. Slim and A. Bonwick, Protection: An ALNAP Guide for Humanitarian Agencies (London: ANALP/ODI, 2005) 
(https://www.alnap.org/help-library/protection-an-alnap-guide-for-humanitarian-agencies).
101	 C. Morrison, Civilian Protection in Urban Sieges: Capacities and Practices of First Responders in Syria (London: IIED, 
2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10834IIED), p. 6. 


===== PAGE 216 =====
206    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
actors as much as possible in the lead. The case study in Box 4.18, summarising findings 
from research on an IDP protection response in Somalia, illustrates and reinforces this 
basic principle. 
A 2017 guidance note from the Syria crises on integrating livelihoods and protection observes 
that ‘Economic insecurity, discrimination, and marginalisation increase the protection risk 
for the displaced as they seek income-generating opportunities, creating a need for a more 
integrated approach to livelihoods initiatives’.102 The note presents ten ‘core principles’ 
for improving protection in relation to livelihoods, including developing complaints and 
feedback mechanisms and engaging private sector partners in protection.
102	 L. G. Bermudez, Integrating Livelihoods and Protection for Displaced Persons in Urban Humanitarian Response. 
Guidance Note for Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10829IIED), p. 3.
Box 4.18  Protecting internally displaced communities in Somalia: 
experience from the Benadir region
‘Given the multi-dimensional nature of protection, multi-stakeholder engagement 
must be assured. The study findings indicate that IDP protection strategies should 
be integrated into various government sector plans and that community stakeholder 
engagement should be included in planning processes. It is imperative that protection 
activists adapt to the challenging conditions in the communities and promote 
advocacy and protection efforts to strengthen the resilience of IDPs at individual, 
household, and community levels.
‘The study proposes a systems-based framework to address protection challenges 
across the various resilience dimensions, including human capital, health, security, 
governance and social capital. An integrated institutional framework for the 
identification, inclusion and support for physical and rights-based protection would 
offer a galvanised approach to enhancing resilience.
‘The study recommends improvements to the government of Somalia’s existing 
IDP protection policy, which would help to ensure better identification, inclusion 
and support for the socioeconomic, physical, and rights-based protection of IDPs. 
Integrating legal assistance programmes in the current protection and resilience 
programmes would play a crucial role to support IDPs to access public justice 
services. Ensuring documentation of IDPs through a central registry and the creation 
of a special agency for IDPs is also proposed.’
Source: Quoted from M. Mohamoud et al., Protecting Internally Displaced Communities in Somalia: Experience from the 
Benadir Region (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10841IIED).


===== PAGE 217 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    207
See L. G. Bermudez, Integrating Livelihoods and Protection for Displaced Persons in Urban 
Humanitarian Response. Guidance Note for Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) 
(http://pubs.iied.org/10829IIED).
For further information on mainstreaming protection, see the Global Protection Cluster’s tips 
at 
http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/_assets/files/aors/protection_mainstreaming/
Protection_Mainstreaming_Training_Package_SECTORGUIDANCE_November_2014.pdf.
4.7.2 Protection in naturally-triggered disasters
Naturally-triggered disasters usually expose existing vulnerabilities, including:103
•	
Lack of safety and security, for example living in temporary, insecure shelter and crime.
•	
Family separation, particularly affecting more vulnerable groups, such as children, 
older people and people with disabilities. 
•	
Loss of documentation. 
•	
Weak law enforcement. 
•	
Gender-based violence (discussed below).
•	
Forced relocation.
•	
Unequal access to assistance and discrimination in aid provision.
•	
Abuse, neglect and exploitation of children (see below) and vulnerable adults.
•	
Loss of communication means/channels and poor complaints mechanisms.
•	
Lack of access to livelihood opportunities and service providers.
The IASC’s operational guidelines for protection in naturally-triggered disaster situations is 
organised into four groups as follows:
1.	 Protection of life; security and physical integrity of the person; and family ties, for 
example life-saving measures, in particular evacuation and protection against family 
separation. 
2.	 Protection of rights related to the provision of food, health, shelter and education.
3.	 Protection of rights relating to HLP rights (see Section 4.1), livelihoods (see Section 
4.5) and education (see Section 4.6).
103	 This discussion draws on IASC Operational Guidelines on the Protection of Persons in Situations of Natural Disasters 
(Washington DC: Brookings – Bern Project on Internal Displacement, 2011) (https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/
IDPersons/OperationalGuidelines_IDP.pdf).


===== PAGE 218 =====
208    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
4.	 Protection of rights relating to documentation, freedom of movement, re-establishing 
family ties and assembly and electoral rights. 
As well as pre-existing vulnerabilities, the Global Protection Cluster notes that:
Disasters often give rise to new protection concerns. Population displacement, weak law 
enforcement and the breakdown of social safety mechanisms can heighten the risks of 
looting, gender-based violence and child trafficking. When such issues are not addressed 
in the initial stages of a humanitarian response, violations are both more likely to occur and 
more likely to continue after the emergency is over. Responses include simple measures 
such as floodlighting and lockable shelter kits, and more technical programmes such as 
family tracing, training of border guards, and monitoring of vulnerable groups.104 
104	 Global Protection Cluster, ‘Strengthening Protection in Natural Disaster Response: Introduction’, in ‘Protection 
Cluster Coordination Toolbox’, 2019 (http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/tools-and-guidance/protection-cluster-
coordination-toolbox/).
Box 4.19  Protection after the 2010 Haiti earthquake
‘In response to reports of gender-based violence in bathrooms at night, young 
women were consulted on the design and placement of toilets. Narrow and steep 
passageways made of loose gravel were paved and widened or made into staircases 
with handrails. Retaining walls were important risk reduction infrastructure installed 
to prevent landslides and create more livable space. However, the walls also created 
significant drop offs, potentially dangerous to children. To protect children, guardrails 
were erected at child height at every drop off. Guardrails were also located along the 
length of the ravine and on the footbridges installed by the program. The process, as 
much as the physical improvements, reduced the vulnerability of the community.
‘In addition to the physical improvements, [the NGO] KATYE aimed to establish the 
social structures necessary for a safe community. A team of community members 
worked with the protection team to identify and address potential protection 
violations such as mitigating the risk of corruption and exploitation related to CFW. 
They participated in trainings on potential abuses of the CFW system provided to each 
CFW participant. Supervisors were thoroughly versed in the zero tolerance policy and 
systems for reporting violations and the protection team followed up every reported 
case. Relative to committees focused on water management, sustaining these teams 
proved more challenging. At minimum, these activities prevented people’s exposure 
to further harm as a result of project activities. At best, they are a sustained system 
for identifying and addressing protection issues in a vulnerable community.’
Source: E. Kessler, Katye Neighborhood Improvement Program: Evaluation of CHF Program (Tabarre: USAID, 2012).


===== PAGE 219 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    209
For guidance on disasters and protection, see the Global Protection Cluster’s ‘Protection 
Cluster Coordination Toolbox’ at: http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/tools-and-
guidance/protection-cluster-coordination-toolbox/.
4.7.3 Protection and forced displacement
Forcibly displaced people face a number of challenges, including difficulties accessing 
employment and livelihood opportunities (which may be a particular problem for refugees, 
who may not legally be allowed to work), violence, finding somewhere to live, accessing 
education and discrimination.     
Concerning refugees, UNHCR emphasises the need for registration as an essential tool for 
protection against refoulement, accessing basic rights, identifying specific needs, family 
reunification and the pursuit of durable solutions. Registration is also essential for needs 
assessment, programme planning and management of operations, and in engaging with 
official authorities, the police and other public bodies.
There are also many reasons why refugees and IDPs avoid being registered, including 
protection concerns. These populations can be targeted for assistance in cities without the 
need for registration through area-based approaches that identify neighbourhoods hosting 
the highest numbers of IDPs and refugees, although this leaves IDPs and refugees living 
outside of these areas unassisted. Profiling exercises are also useful to identify areas where 
these people are living and in understanding their protection needs.
The US State Department’s Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM)’s guidance 
on refugee protection in urban areas emphasises the need to identify and support the most 
vulnerable and prioritise access to services and legal protection, while also undertaking 
efforts that provide wider benefits to community members.105 Community-based protection 
is emphasised by the ICRC, which states that its approach is ‘to ensure that [ICRC’s] activities 
on behalf of IDPs and those at risk of displacement support, rather than undermine, 
communities’ and individuals’ self-protection mechanisms and coping strategies’.106
For further reading, see Angela Cotroneo and Marta Pawlak, ‘Community-based Protection: 
The ICRC Approach’, Forced Migration Review 53, October 2016 (https://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/
fmr-53-community-based-protection-icrc-approach).
105	 US State Department Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM), PRM Principles for Refugee Protection 
in Urban Areas, 2012 (https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/187237.pdf).
106	 A. Cotroneo and M. Pawlak, ‘Community-based Protection: The ICRC Approach’, Forced Migration Review 53, 
October 2016 (https://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/fmr-53-community-based-protection-icrc-approach), p. 36.


===== PAGE 220 =====
210    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
4.7.4 Protection and urban warfare
A 2017 research report concerning civilian protection in urban conflict found that a wide 
range of actors engage in what can broadly be termed as protection: ‘organisations 
and individuals engage in what can be loosely termed civilian protection of some type, 
without necessarily being aware of how this links to international norms and practices 
or even perceiving themselves as doing protection work’. The report makes the following 
recommendations to improve civilian protection:
•	
‘Develop more inclusive ways to relate international protection norms and frameworks 
and build a closer engagement with local actors and their understandings, activities 
and capabilities. 
•	
Extend guidance and information within international humanitarian law and other 
binding frameworks to operationalise first response activities with a focus on 
ground-level governance, coordination and capacities. 
•	
Widen the narrative on what constitutes “humanitarian” response, focusing firstly 
on local capabilities and how international actors can support these, not the other 
way round. 
•	
Adopt more inclusive mechanisms that integrate a larger set of first response actors 
and other stakeholders involved in civilian protection.’
See C. Morrison, Civilian Protection in Urban Sieges: Capacities and Practices of First Responders 
in Syria (London: IIED Working Paper, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.org/10834IIED).
See also ICRC and InterAction, When War Moves to Cities: Protection of Civilians in Urban Areas 
Outcome Report, 2017 (https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/When%20
War%20Moves%20to%20Cities%20-%20Report_May%202017_0.pdf).
4.7.5 Protection and urban violence 
IRC’s 2017 report Violence in the City identifies a number of drivers of urban violence, 
organised according to four levels: structural, community, familial and individual. These are 
shown in Figure 4.3.
A 2016 working paper on humanitarian protection in violent urban contexts observes that 
‘protection work in violent urban settings is characterized by having blurred lines throughout 
the elements and approaches that interact between each other. For example, this interaction 
includes blurred lines between emergency and development; rights based approach and 
needs based approach, and assistance and protection’. The research concludes that, as 
a result: ‘[this] implies that in urban violence humanitarian actors rarely tackle the urban 


===== PAGE 221 =====
Sectoral responses    |    211
   
  E
co
no
mi
c s
tra
in
   
   
   
   
   
 P
oli
cy
 co
nc
er
ns/
lac
k o
f le
ga
l p
ro
te
cti
on
s   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Ha
rm
fu
l g
en
de
r n
or
ms
    
   
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
Ge
nd
er 
in
eq
ua
lit
y  
   
   
   
   
    
    
    
   
    
   
    
   
   
   
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
D
is
p
la
c
e
m
en
t
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
L
o
ss
 a
n
d 
gr
i
ef
Po
lit
ic
al 
vi
ol
en
ce
    
 S
tr
es
se
d i
nf
ra
st
ru
ct
ur
e 
an
d 
re
so
ur
ce
s 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 W
ea
k s
ec
uri
ty 
in
sti
tu
tio
ns 
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
    
    
    
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 Fr
ac
tu
re
d s
oc
ial
   
   
   
   
   
  n
et
wo
rk
s
  
Dis
cr
im
in
ati
on
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
Substance abuse
Chapter 4
Figure 4.3 Drivers of violence in urban humanitarian settings
Source: IRC, Violence in the City: A Systematic Review of the Drivers of Violence against Displaced Populations in Urban 
Crisis and Post-crisis Settings (London: IRC, 2017), p. 14 (https://www.rescue.org/sites/default/files/document/1325/
violenceinthecityweb.pdf). 
Structural
Individual
Familial
Community-
level
problematic with a single approach, but combine different approaches and integrate various 
forms of response’.107 
Urban violence is discussed further in Section 1.2.2.
107	 O. F. C. Aguirre, Humanitarian Protection in Violent Urban Settings: Challenges and Dynamics, CERAH Working Paper 
36 (Geneva: CERAH, 2016), p. 30 (https://cerahgeneve.ch/files/9514/8163/3254/WP36-Humanitarian-Protection-Violent-
Urban-Settings.pdf).


===== PAGE 222 =====
212    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
4.7.6 Protection and particular groups
The following section reviews protection in relation to particular groups.
Child protection
A 2015 study of child friendly spaces (CFS) in humanitarian emergencies notes that the use of 
CFS is ‘profoundly different’ in urban areas than in camps, and points to the need to ‘evolve 
strategies that are more effective in urban settings, where there are so many other activities 
that children are able to engage in. Increasingly, emergency response requires adjustments 
to programming to reflect the prevailing and unique challenges of an urban environment. 
Thus, it is critically important to examine if CFS is the best strategic approach in urban 
setting[s] for highly mobile population[s]’.108 
A study of community-based child protection mechanisms among urban refugees in 
Kampala109 found that going to school was ‘the most effective way to protect refugee 
children from harm … The protective factor mentioned most commonly was that while a 
child is in school, he or she is safe, supervised and, most of all, busy’. Conversely, not having 
access to formal education was considered the greatest threat to protection: ‘Young girls 
were said to be at risk of rape, more so than boys, especially if they were out of school’.
The Child Protection Minimum Standards (CPMS) comprise guidance and information 
concerning child protection in emergencies, though there is no distinction between rural 
and urban settings. See https://alliancecpha.org/cpms/.
The Global Protection Cluster’s child protection checklist is at http://cpaor.net/sites/default/
files/cp/2016/2017%2009%2028%20CP%20HNO-HRP%20checklist.pdf.
Further information relating to child protection can also be found at:
•	
WHO, INSPIRE: Seven Strategies for Ending Violence against Children, 2016 
(http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/inspire/en/).
•	
Global Protection Cluster, Minimum Standards for Child Protection Alliance for Child 
Protection in Humanitarian Action, 2012 (https://emergency.unhcr.org/entry/223550/
minimum-standards-for-child-protection-in-humanitarian-action).
108	 Evaluation of Child Friendly Spaces: Findings from an Inter-agency Series of Impact Evaluations in Humanitarian 
Settings (New York and Geneva: Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health and World Vision International, 
2015) (https://www.wvi.org/sites/default/files/Evaluation%20of%20CFS_Final%20Research%20Report.pdf), p. 21.
109	 R. Horn et al., Community Based Child Protection Mechanisms amongst Urban Refugees in Kampala, Uganda: An 
Ethnographic Study, Save the Children (https://resourcecentre.savethechildren.net/node/14051/pdf/25-cbcpms-
uganda-final-13-december-2013.pdf), p. 6.


===== PAGE 223 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    213
•	
Child Protection Working Group (CPWG) Child Labour Task Force, Responding to 
the Worst Forms of Child Labour in Emergencies, 2010 (https://resourcecentre.
savethechildren.net/node/11090/pdf/Review_Responding_to-_WFCL_in_
Emergencies_final.pdf).
Mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS)
One global review of MPHSS concludes that ‘There is a lack of guidance on how to support 
MHPSS programs in non-emergency and/or urban settings’.110 UNHCR’s Operational 
Guidance: Mental Health and Psychosocial Support Programming for Refugee Operations 
observes that organising MPHSS interventions in urban settings presents problems in terms 
of access, identifying who is particularly vulnerable and developing appropriate levels and 
types of support.111 Examples of what has worked include:
•	
Psychosocial case managers who can connect vulnerable refugees to support 
services.
•	
Work to strengthen existing health services to enable refugee access (see Section 
4.8 on health).
•	
Community centres that include psychosocial support within other activities, such as 
livelihoods development/support.
•	
Using volunteers to set up support groups and make home visits.
•	
Identifying and ensuring access to existing mental health services.
•	
Opening phone hotlines for general information and emergency response.
Generic guidance sources containing information relevant to urban practice include:
UNHCR, Community-based Protection and Mental Health and Psychosocial Support, June 2017 
(http://www.unhcrexchange.org/communities/9159/contents/347734).
IASC, IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support, 2007 (https://interagency 
standingcommittee.org/mental-health-and-psychosocial-support-emergency-settings-0/
content/iasc-guidelines-mental-health).
110	 S. Meyer, UNHCR’s Mental Health and Psychosocial Support for Persons of Concern (Geneva: Policy Development and 
Evaluation Service, 2013) (https://www.unhcr.org/51bec3359.pdf), p. 8.
111	 UNHCR, Operational Guidance: Mental Health and Psychosocial Support Programming for Refugee Operations 
(Geneva: Division of Programme Support and Management, 2013) (https://cms.emergency.unhcr.org/
documents/11982/54561/UNHCR%2C+Operational+Guidance+-+Mental+Health+and+Psychosocial+Support+Program
ming+for+Refugee+Operations%2C+2013+--/1e901241-4b2d-4984-82b9-b0c31255f572), p. 46.


===== PAGE 224 =====
214    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Box 4.20  MHPSS provision for refugees in Costa Rica
‘Casa de Derechos [House of Rights] is a community center that is a joint effort between 
UNHCR, the Municipality of Desamparados and other implementing partners, in San 
Jose, Costa Rica. Of the 20,000 or so refugees in Costa Rica, the majority are Colombian, 
and have resided in urban areas for more than 8 years. UNHCR’s operation is focused on 
local integration of refugees, and as such, supports a number of activities, such as Casa 
de Derechos, that provides services and activities to achieve this durable solution.
‘The center provides a range of services and activities, including microfinance, 
public health outreach, legal services and support groups to refugees and the local 
community. “Diverse groups” of members of the refugee population have been 
established to support youth, men and women to discuss common problems and 
interests. The center hosts a number of programs provided by other agencies and 
partners, including a legal aid clinic, a program focusing on youth and vocational 
training, and a labour rights program.
‘The focus on multiple, integrated activities came from recognition from UNHCR 
and other actors that Colombian refugees often had a range of mental health and 
psychosocial issues such that “it’s going to be quite difficult for them to integrate 
because maybe they have so many other issues that they need to resolve somehow 
before getting to the point where they can actually apply for a job and go to the job 
interview and actually get the job or use micro credit effectively.” The center also 
responds specifically to the needs of urban refugees in this context, given in San Jose, 
“[r]efugees don’t have any places where they would naturally get together. So we 
needed to establish those bases for them. They might not know any other refugees. So, 
it’s about trying to facilitate those basic processes.”
‘There is a specific focus within the center on survivors of SGBV, who are able to access 
counselling and support groups. An evaluation of UNHCR’s AGDM activities described 
this program as “a model for dealing with SGBV cases,” given staff are well-trained 
in provision of legal and psychosocial support, and partner organisations refer SGBV 
survivors to the center for support. As such, the center provides both Level 2 and Level 
3 activities from the Intervention Pyramid, providing focused and specialised support 
to SGBV survivors, and activating social support networks amongst refugees through 
provision of a place to meet and interact, as well as provision of other services to 
facilitate local integration’.
Source: Quoted from S. Meyer, UNHCR’s Mental Health and Psychosocial Support for Persons of Concern (Geneva: Policy 
Development and Evaluation Service, 2013) (https://www.unhcr.org/51bec3359.pdf), p. 28.


===== PAGE 225 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    215
Psychosocial support is also discussed in Section 4.6 on education in emergencies. 
Gender-based violence (GBV)
The IASC defines gender-based violence (GBV) as ‘an umbrella term for any harmful act 
that is perpetrated against a person’s will, and that is based on socially ascribed [gender] 
differences between males and females’.112
The Women’s Refugee Commission (WRC)’s Urban Gender-Based Violence Risk Assessment 
Guidance notes that ‘Refugees living in cities face high risks of gender-based violence (GBV), 
often on a daily basis. Some of these risks affect members of the host community as well. 
Where refugee women, for instance, experience sexual harassment or unwanted touching 
when taking public transportation, it may be the case that all women in that city encounter 
similar threats whenever they board a bus or take the metro’. The guidance assessment asks 
questions concerning transport, urban isolation, employment and livelihoods and housing. 
The full set of questions is at http://www.unicefinemergencies.com/downloads/
eresource/docs/Disability/Urban-GBV-Guidance-Identifying-Risks-Pilot.pdf. For examples 
from Beirut, Delhi, Kampala and Santo Domingo, see Women’s Refugee Commission, 
Interventions for Strengthening GBV Prevention and Response for Urban Refugees, March 
2017 
(https://www.womensrefugeecommission.org/gbv/resources/1462-urban-gbv-case-
studies). See also World Refugee Commission, Mean Streets: Identifying and Responding to 
Urban Refugees’ Risks of Gender-Based Violence (New York: Women’s Refugee Commission, 2016) 
(https://www.womensrefugeecommission.org/gbv/resources/1272-mean-streets).
Sources of guidance on tackling GBV include:
IASC, Guidelines for Integrating Gender-based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian 
Action: Reducing Risk, Promoting Resilience, and Aiding Recovery (Geneva: IASC, 2015) 
(http://gbvguidelines.org/en/home/).
ChildFund International and Women’s Refugee Commission, Gender-based Violence 
Against Children and Youth with Disabilities: A Toolkit for Child Protection Actors  (Richmond, 
VA and New York: ChildFund International and Women’s Refugee Commission, 2016) 
(www.womensrefugeecommission.org/populations/disabilities/research-and-
resources/1289-youth-disabilities-toolkit).
Women’s Refugee Commission and International Rescue Committee, Building Capacity 
in Disability Inclusion in Gender-based Violence Programming in Humanitarian Settings: 
A Toolkit for GBV Practitioners (New York: Women’s Refugee Commission and Inter-
112	 IASC, Guidelines for Gender-based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Settings (New York: IASC, 2005).


===== PAGE 226 =====
216    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
national Rescue Committee, 2015 (www.womensrefugeecommission.org/?option=com_
zdocs&view=document&id=1173).
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ+) people
A 2013 study of sexually and non-gender conforming (SGN) urban refugees in Mexico, South 
Africa and Uganda documented protection concerns including ‘commonplace’ assaults by 
the authorities, common assaults by local populations and other refugees and widespread 
discrimination, leading to reduced access to healthcare, information and social networks. 
The study provided a number of recommendations for improving protection, covering 
awareness training, building SGN networks and advocacy. The full report is ORAM, Blind 
Alleys: The Unseen Struggles of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex Urban 
Refugees in Mexico, Uganda and South Africa, 2013 (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/
content/resource/files/main/oram-ba-synthesiseng-lr.pdf).
See also the chapter on LGBT refugees in WRC, Mean Streets, cited above.
Concerning naturally-triggered disasters, a 2018 research report from Oxfam states that:
criminalisation, discrimination and marginalisation creates vulnerabilities before 
disasters, leading to specific and disproportionate disaster impact on gender and sexual 
minorities. Systemic institutional and societal discrimination in accessing justice, health, 
education, employment, housing, and other services does not go away after a disaster, 
neither does marginalisation due to exclusion from families, communities, religious and 
other organisations.113
The report also found that ‘humanitarian programs are often blind to the vulnerabilities, 
needs and strengths of sexual and gender minorities’, and that ‘Assumptions underlying 
mainstream programs may inadvertently exclude some sexual and gender minorities, or 
may exacerbate pre-disaster marginalisation’.
People with disabilities
A 2008 Resource Kit for Fieldworkers concerning disabilities among refugees and conflict-
affected populations observes that ‘Problems of physical accessibility were often worse for 
refugees living in urban areas [compared to camps], where the opportunities to adapt or 
modify physical infrastructure were much more limited’. Unable to leave their homes or move 
around easily, ‘many refugees with disabilities faced greater levels of isolation than before 
113	 Oxfam Australia, Down by the River: Addressing the Rights, Needs and Strengths of Fijian Sexual and Gender 
Minorities in Disaster Risk Reduction and Humanitarian Response (Carlton: Oxfam Australia, 2018) 
(https://www.gdnonline.org/resources/Down-By-The-River_Web.pdf).


===== PAGE 227 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    217
Box 4.21  Making disaster risk reduction and relief programmes 
LGBTI-inclusive: lessons from Nepal
‘Research on post-disaster and crisis situations demonstrates that emergencies often 
exacerbate prejudices and make marginalised people more vulnerable. Although disaster 
risk reduction (DRR) and relief protocols are increasingly sensitive to the needs of at-
risk and vulnerable populations, the specific vulnerabilities of LGBTI people are often 
overlooked. Nepal offers some compelling examples for implementing LGBTI-inclusive 
DRR and relief policies and protocols. With full legal protections for LGBTI people 
(including legal recognition for a third gender category marked “third gender” or “other” 
on documents and registers, including the federal census), the local political landscape 
is conducive. 
‘Nepal is also highly disaster-prone. While implementation of LGBTI-friendly DRR 
and relief programmes has only just begun, Nepal’s experience is indicative of how 
improvements to existing programmes and policies can be put into practice around the 
world. LGBTI people may live in non-traditional arrangements. For example, in societies 
where having children in the household substantiates the claim of having established a 
“family”, LGBTI people living without children in their homes can suffer. 
‘The scope of inclusion
‘In relief policies and protocols, there are several important considerations for ensuring 
inclusion of the LGBTI population. These include, but are not limited to:
‘How the definition of “family” or “household” may affect same-sex couples and their 
households, groups of people who do not live in traditional family units and homeless 
people or people who migrate. Red Cross-Nepal’s definition of “family unit” includes non-
traditional and non-heterosexual groups of people living together.
‘How transgender (or, more broadly, non-male, non-female) people can safely access 
facilities such as health clinics, bathrooms and shelters which are male/female gender-
segregated. The construction of Nepal’s first gender-inclusive public toilet in Nepalgunj 
demonstrates the government’s commitment to inclusive facilities.
‘How government-issued identification documents are used to validate citizens or grant 
access to assistance, and how this might affect people whose current appearance does not 
match the gender listed and the photo presented on the documents. The government of 
Nepal recently implemented a 2007 Supreme Court decision to issue citizenship certificates 
and other documents with the gender designation ‘other’ based on self-identification.


===== PAGE 228 =====
218    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Box 4.21  (continued)
‘How people living with HIV/AIDS can access appropriate Anti-Retroviral Therapy (ART) 
in a safe and timely manner. Nepal currently stocks eight months-worth of ART supplies 
in the central Kathmandu warehouse.
‘How all data collection and intake surveys, interfaces and databases can be adjusted to 
capture meaningful data on LGBTI populations in emergency situations.
‘As aid organisations become more LGBTI-inclusive, it will be crucial to consider 
local legal systems and consult regularly with local NGOs and experts. Not only will 
this improve the nuance of programming, but it will also empower LGBTI people and 
organisations to act in the wake of disasters. As Nepal’s experience demonstrates, 
having a friendly legal environment and political landscape can expedite inclusive 
policies. Nonetheless, small changes to DRR and relief policies across legal and political 
contexts can prevent significant injury and loss of life, and ensure the continuation of 
important LGBTI protection and human rights activities despite disasters.’
Source: Kyle Knight and Richard Sollom, ‘Making Disaster Risk Reduction and Relief Programmes LGBTI-inclusive: 
Examples from Nepal’, Humanitarian Exchange 55, September 2012 (https://odihpn.org/magazine/making-disaster-risk-
reduction-and-relief-programmes-lgbti-inclusive-examples-from-nepal/).
their displacement’. Refugees with disabilities also typically have little contact with local 
displaced people’s organisations’.114 Other research on disabled people forcibly displaced 
from Syria likewise found that ‘Persons with disabilities in these communities are not very 
visible. This was illustrated by the fact that leaders sometimes denied the existence of such 
people in communities’.115 The research notes a range of challenges facing disabled people, 
including buying and preparing food, limited employment opportunities and unsuitable 
accommodation. 
For further information regarding disability, conflict and refugees, see R. Reilly, ‘Disability 
among Refugees and Forcibly Displaced Populations’, Forced Migration Review 35, July 2010 
(https://www.fmreview.org/disability-and-displacement/rachael-reilly).
114	 Women’s Commission for Refugee Women and Children, Disabilities among Refugees and Conflict-affected 
Populations: Resource Kit for Fieldworkers, 2008 (http://www.corteidh.or.cr/tablas/25417.pdf).
115	 M. Crock and L. Smith-Khan, Syrian Refugees with Disabilities in Jordan and Turkey (Sydney: University of Sydney, 
2015) (https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Laura_Smith-Khan/publication/281853465_Syrian_refugees_with_
disabilities_in_Jordan_and_Turkey/links/55fb8ba508ae07629e07bdec/Syrian-refugees-with-disabilities-in-Jordan-and-
Turkey.pdf?origin=publication_detail), p. 10.


===== PAGE 229 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    219
See also: 
UNICEF, ‘Including Children with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action: Child Protection 
Guidance’, 2017 (http://training.unicef.org/disability/emergencies/protection.html).
UNHCR, Need to Know Guidance on Working with Persons with Disabilities in Forced 
Displacement (Geneva: UNHCR, 2011) (http://www.unhcr.org/4ec3c81c9.pdf).
Handicap International, Toolkit on Protection of Persons with Disabilities, 2008 
(http://www.globalprotectioncluster.org/_assets/files/tools_and_guidance/age_gender_
diversity/HandicapInt_Toolkit_Protection_Disabilities_2008_EN.pdf).
ADCAP, Humanitarian Inclusion Standards for Older People and People with Disabilities 
(Bensheim, London and Lyon: CBM International, HelpAge International and Handicap 
International, 2018) (www.helpage.org/download/5a7ad49b81cf8).
Box 4.22  Protecting urban refugee women and girls with disabilities 
from abuse and discrimination in Kenya
In 2016 the Kenyan network Women Challenged to Challenge (WCC) ‘identified refugee women 
and girls with disabilities as a priority group in all of their programs. The organization started 
assessing the situations of urban refugee women with disabilities through home visits, in 
order to better understand the challenges they face. WCC facilitated 20 urban refugee women 
with disabilities’ participation in the 2016 Humanitarian Action Training for Women Leaders 
of Disabled Persons’ Organizations (DPOs) organized by WRC. This training presented an 
opportunity for the women refugees to interact, and share their experiences, with key actors 
such as UN Women, HIAS, the International Rescue Committee (IRC) and DPOs. As a result of 
this training, refugee women with disabilities were able to strengthen their advocacy messages 
and learned from the experiences of those involved in Gender-Based Violence (GBV) programs.
‘Following these activities, WCC developed a new training program for urban refugees 
with disabilities in Nairobi. This program was described as a “lifechanging event” by all of 
the women attending. The women learned about economic empowerment, sexual and 
reproductive health, and legal rights. They also developed their self-esteem and discovered 
that they were not alone in their situation’.
Source: ‘Protecting Urban Refugee Women and Girls with Disabilities from Abuse and Discrimination in Kenya’, WCC, 
2016 (https://www.makingitwork-crpd.org/sites/default/files/2018-05/Kenya%20-%20Protecting%20urban%20
refugee%20women%20and%20girls%20with%20disabilities%20from%20abuse%20and%20discrimination%20in%20
Kenya%20%28WCC%29.pdf).


===== PAGE 230 =====
220    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
4.8 Health 
Health systems include ‘all organisations, people and actions whose primary intent is to 
promote, restore, or maintain health’.116 Urban health systems represent a complex mix of 
the built environment and social processes, both formal and informal. City health systems 
include costly healthcare infrastructure and services, which can be seriously affected by 
disasters and conflict. Investment in the health sector is expensive, and when losses are 
substantial they can take years to recover. 
Many people affected by conflict and disaster may have limited access to healthcare. 
Emergencies can cause disruption and strain due to infrastructure damage, loss of medical 
equipment and health staff and increased demand for services. Finally, baseline deficits 
in public health infrastructure and the physical and social determinants of health in rapidly 
growing cities may present a pre-existing health emergency even prior to a disaster or conflict.
This section117 reviews health in urban emergencies. It discusses urban healthcare 
provision, and the role of cash and markets in health during urban crises. Health and forced 
displacement in urban areas is discussed. This section links to a number of others in this 
Good Practice Review, in particular food security (Section 4.9) and cash (Section 3.3).
4.8.1 Health in urban emergencies 
Different emergencies will result in differing needs. For instance, an earthquake causes 
immediate crush injuries and other related effects (see Table 4.4), while conflict will add 
penetrating wounds from bombs or gunshots and, for many, longer-term mental health 
disorders (referred to below). According to the World Health Organisation (WHO),118 the 
health impacts of urban disasters can be organised into four broad categories:
•	
Communicable diseases, exacerbated by population movements and overcrowding.
•	
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs), including lifestyle diseases (such as hypertension 
and obesity) and conditions needing long-term care (such as kidney disease requiring 
dialysis), exacerbated by disrupted access to medications.
•	
Mental health and psychosocial (MHPSS) disorders, created or exacerbated by trauma.
•	
Trauma due to external causes, such as falling buildings or electrocution.
116	 Everybody’s Business: Strengthening Health Systems to Improve Health Outcomes. WHO’s Framework for Action 
(Geneva: WHO, 2017) (https://www.who.int/healthsystems/strategy/everybodys_business.pdf).
117	 This section benefited in particular from the inputs of Dr Ronak Patel, Clinical Assistant Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, Stanford University.
118	 WHO, Technical Report: Health Systems in Urban Disasters, 2013 (https://extranet.who.int/kobe_centre/en).


===== PAGE 231 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    221
Similarly, one review119 identifies the generalised health consequences of urban crises:
•	
Infectious pathogens can spread more easily given population movements and 
density, low vaccination coverage and compromised herd immunity, along with 
inadequate capacity to detect and respond to outbreaks.
•	
Underlying poor health from malnutrition, frequent illnesses, inadequate access to 
care and baseline deficits in water, sanitation and public health infrastructure can all 
be exacerbated. 
•	
Mental health needs increase directly from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
depression and anxiety, alongside disruption to prior support and care systems.
•	
Increased trauma and injury, including from higher rates of urban violence.
•	
Gender-based violence may increase.
•	
Chronic diseases can be exacerbated by disruptions in care, leading to acute 
medical crisis.
Table 4.4 gives examples of health needs resulting from two earthquakes.
The Sphere Project’s 2018 revision notes that identifying people at risk120 and who may not 
have access to healthcare  poses  particular  challenges: 
people seeking refuge in towns and cities often do not have information about existing 
health services or how to access them, risking  a  further  increase  in  communicable 
diseases. Outreach will help people cope with new urban stresses such as inadequate 
access to shelter, food, healthcare, jobs or social support networks.121 
The revision also notes that ‘Rumours and misinformation spread quickly in cities’. This was a 
particular issue in the West Africa Ebola response; as one study by ALNAP explains:
Much of the initial communication [around Ebola] was dramatic and negative: ‘Ebola 
kills’, ‘There is no cure’ and ‘Don’t touch’ …  The public, not understanding, responded in 
panic, hiding sick relatives, reporting fewer cases and spreading misinformation. Several 
interviewees shared anecdotes of community members who saw neighbours taken to a 
119	 C. Deola and R. Patel ‘Health Outcomes of Crisis Driven Urban Displacement: A Conceptual Framework’, Disaster 
Health 2(2), 2014 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28229003).
120	 See also WHO, Rapid Risk Assessment of Acute Public Health Events, 2012, ((http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/
handle/10665/70810/WHO_HSE_GAR_ARO_2012.1_eng.pdf?sequence=1).
121	 The Sphere Handbook, Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Humanitarian Response, 2018 
(https://handbook.spherestandards.org/), chapter 8.


===== PAGE 232 =====
222    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Table 4.4  Frameworks that can be adapted to urban post-conflict contexts
Source: L. Mohiddin, G. Smith and L. Phelps, Urban Response Analysis Framework (URAF). Guidance Note for Humanitarian Practitioners (London: IIED, 2017) (http://pubs.iied.
org/10824IIED), p. 15.
Disaster
Great East Japan 
Earthquake
Chile Earthquake
Communicable 
diseases
Health consequences 
of prolonged 
evacuation 
Respiratory problems
Outbreak risks
Influenza and 
influenza-like 
illnesses
Food and water-
borne diseases
Tetanus
Legionellosis
Communicable 
diseases
Skin lesions
Ectoparasites
Respiratory infections
Outbreaks or 
epidemics
Endemic diseases
NCDs and chronic 
illnesses
Chronic medical 
conditions
Health consequences 
of prolonged 
evacuation
Dialysis patients
Hypertension
Deep vein thrombosis
Diabetes
Musculoskeletal 
diseases
Poor diet and lack of 
exercise
Obesity
Long-term care
Post organ transplant
Heart disease
Asthma
Cancer
Chronic lung disease
Hypercholesterolemia
Care for patients 
dependent on oxygen 
and dialysis
Chronic illnesses
MHPSS
Health and mental 
health consequences 
of prolonged 
evacuation
Stress
Suicide
PTSD
Insomnia
Constipation
Somatisation 
of mental and 
psychosocial 
conditions
MHPSS for children, 
adults and the 
elderly
Anxiety
Depression
Violent behaviour
External causes
Crushing deaths
Multi-hazard impacts 
and approach
Deaths
Drowning
Injuries and trauma
Tsunami-associated 
pneumonia (soujou 
haien)
Chemical burns of 
responders
Short- to long-term 
effects of radiation 
on health
Broken bones
Winter season coming
Trauma
Effects of earthquake 
and tsunami
Environmental 
health
Environmental health 
monitoring and 
management related 
to radioactive waste
Lack of understanding 
of radiation and its 
effects
Water and food safety
Health needs in 
evacuation centres
Flies and mosquitos
Management of dead 
bodies
Carbon monoxide 
poisoning
Sanitation
Human waste disposal
Waste water 
management
Water and food safety
Vulnerable groups
Care for vulnerable 
groups: women, 
pregnant women, 
elderly, disabled 
persons and 
foreigners
Hypothermia among 
the elderly
Elderly care facilities 
destroyed
Social 
determinants
Risk tolerance of the 
people for the sake of 
continuing lives may 
pose risk to health
Mass population 
movements


===== PAGE 233 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    223
treatment unit who never came back. Humanitarians often failed to understand that, where 
their communications did not address people’s concerns, rumours and misinformation 
would be likely to fill the gap.122
In Sierra Leone, ‘rumours spread that the government was using Ebola for political gains. In 
2015, research found that only 50% of those surveyed in Freetown considered the government 
trustworthy, compared with 70% of the population outside the Freetown capital area’.123
For further discussion of public health crises in cities, see Cities and Public Health 
Crises, Report of the International Consultation, 29–30 October 2008, Lyon, France, 2009 
(https://www.who.int/ihr/lyon/FRWHO_HSE_IHR_LYON_2009.5.pdf?ua=1).
4.8.2 Urban healthcare provision in terms of health systems 
WHO124 emphasises the need to understand urban healthcare in terms of systems,125 
comprising six inter-related sub-systems – governance, health financing, health workforce, 
service delivery, essential medicines and technology and health information systems. 
Recommendations include:
•	
A systems approach helps at all stages of the project management cycle, including 
assessment, monitoring, documentation and evaluation.
•	
The recovery phase provides an opportunity to advocate for better policies and planning.
•	
A critical area that needs strengthening in emergencies is health information 
management, for example disease surveillance, coordination and patient records 
management.
•	
Linked to the last point, external agencies needs to be cognisant of existing systems 
and their structures (see the case study in Box 4.23).
•	
Rigorous evaluations of health systems can be ‘a policy window for health systems 
development’.
122	 L. Campbell and L. M. Morel, Learning from the Ebola Response in Cities: Communication and Engagement (London: 
ALNAP/ODI, 2017) (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/alnap-urban-2017-ebola-
communication-community-engagement.pdf), p. 13.
123	 P. Richards et al., Community Cohesion in Liberia: A Post-war Rapid Social Assessment (Washington DC: World Bank, 
2013), cited in ibid.
124	 WHO, Technical Report: Health Systems in Urban Disasters.
125	 See also ‘Measuring Urban Capacity for Humanitarian Crises: Piloting an Urban Health Response System 
Assessment Tool (UHRSAT)’ (https://www.elrha.org/project/measuring-urban-capacity-humanitarian-crisis-piloting-
urban-health-response/).


===== PAGE 234 =====
224    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Box 4.23  Health response on Luzon island to 2009 Philippines 
typhoons
Three typhoons ravaged Luzon island, northern part of the Philippines, in September and 
October 2009. The metropolitan area that was affected was composed of more than 10 
decentralised cities.
‘During the emergency, national and local governments and hospitals activated their 
emergency response plans and organized their incident command systems. There was 
strong national and local government lead response although most information available 
was from the national government perspective. The delineation of national and local 
government roles was well documented. The Philippines implemented a national version 
of the global cluster system where different sectors/needs were divided into focus areas 
(clusters) led by the government. Strong coordination was achieved between national and 
local governments (different levels), different sectors and government and non-government 
through the clusters. On the other hand, there were challenges in integrating national and 
international response coordinating mechanisms. Clusters were also organized at the local 
level. Some local governments had strong capacity in preparedness and response because 
of strong political will and prior planning. The local health sector is a member of the local 
disaster coordinating body (now disaster risk reduction and management body). Emergency 
response has been rolled down to the community level through the barangay (village) health 
emergency response teams. Hospitals had their own network and referral systems. The 
Philippine experience can give good lessons on how decentralized systems can work.
‘Coordination was challenging within a complex system that was decentralized and with 
a strong private health sector. Coordination had to be built in different levels and lines 
– between national and local, between national and international, inter-sectoral and 
between public and non-government agencies. Coordination at the field level was also a 
different challenge that should be strengthened. The purpose of the clusters must be clear 
to partners and its efficiency must be enhanced. Perhaps as a result of decentralization 
with strong local government units, response efforts have been politicized with possible 
risks to inefficiency and inadequate access to essential health care and medicines. 
Some cities had local level contingency and response plans; development and review of 
these plans must be prioritized. Plans must clearly define the policy shift to emergency 
mode. The health information system must be strengthened and this includes disease 
surveillance, assessment and monitoring of needs, sharing of information and 
documentation. Other response priorities included strengthening of response capacity of 
the health workforce and regulation of donation practices’.
Source: Quoted from WHO, Technical Report: Health Systems in Urban Disasters, p. 46.


===== PAGE 235 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    225
Further information on health systems can be found in UNICEF, Approach to Health Systems 
Strengthening (New York: UNICEF, 2016) (https://www.unicef.org/health/files/UNICEF_HSS_
Approach_-_8Aug16.pdf). See also WHO, Toolkit for Assessing Health System Capacity for 
Crisis Management (Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2012) (http://www.euro.
who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/157886/e96187.pdf); and WHO, Health Systems in 
Urban Disasters (http://www.who.int/kobe_centre/emergencies/Health-systems-in-urban-
disasters_2013.pdf?ua=1). See also several recent studies from Elhra that explore ‘what works’ 
when providing public health services during humanitarian crises (see https://www.elrha.org/
news/eight-new-studies-on-providing-public-health-services-during-humanitarian-crises/).
Section 1.1 on ways of seeing the city provides further discussion of systems.
The case study example from the Philippines in Box 4.23 underscores the importance of a 
coordinated, systems-based approach to urban emergency health.
4.8.3 Good practice in strengthening health systems 
Good practice in this area includes prioritising working through, rebuilding or improving pre-
existing healthcare systems as early as possible. Health interventions must be sustainable, 
and must not be seen purely as short-term life-saving measures built in parallel, as they 
then undercut existing systems. This can be as devastating as the disaster itself, taking 
years to recover.
To these ends, humanitarian agencies should prioritise training local healthcare providers 
for a variety of basic emergency and longer-term mid-level treatment to leave behind 
greater capacity for primary care. Agencies engaged in humanitarian health interventions 
should also understand that there really is no such thing as an isolated health emergency: 
health and the ability to affect people’s health in cities is a function of all the complex 
and interactive systems within the urban space, including shelter, transport, security and 
infrastructure.
Humanitarian agencies should be prepared to deal with psychosocial needs, which are often 
under-addressed before a crisis and compounded afterwards. Agencies should also resource 
interventions for the longer-term physical and psychological rehabilitation required after 
immediate healthcare needs are met. As part of the immediate healthcare response, agencies 
should also implement programmes that include screening for women and children who may 
be vulnerable to gender-based violence, intimate partner violence, trafficking or exploitation.
For further guidance on mental health, see ‘Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in 
Humanitarian Crises’, Humanitarian Exchange 72, July 2018 (https://odihpn.org/magazine/
mental-health-and-psychosocial-support-in-humanitarian-crises/).


===== PAGE 236 =====
226    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
Approaches to assisting rape survivors can be found in WHO, Clinical Management of Rape 
Survivors: Developing Protocols for Use with Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons 
(Geneva: WHO, 2014) (http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/43117/924159263X.
pdf?sequence=1).
4.8.4 Cash, markets and healthcare during urban crises
The Global Health Cluster and WHO126 make the following recommendations concerning the 
use of cash programming:
•	
Cash assistance is helpful – it can make healthcare affordable. 
•	
Cash for health should not replace supply-side health financing, but should 
complement it.
•	
Minimum quality standards in health provision need to be assured.  
Cash is discussed further in Section 3.3.
4.8.5 Health and forced displacement in urban areas
UNHCR’s Operational Guidance on Refugee Protection and Solutions in Urban Areas emphasises 
the need for a multi-sectoral, holistic approach to refugee health in urban areas: ‘The health 
status of refugees will not be improved by health services alone; the underlying determinants of 
health must also be addressed by improving livelihoods and income, food security and nutrition, 
housing, education and access to water and sanitation services’.127 To achieve this, UNHCR 
advocates a ‘three-pronged approach’ of advocacy, support and monitoring and evaluation.
A review of good practice by UNHCR128 identifies the following key points to consider 
concerning health provision in urban refugee settings:
•	
The availability of health services (for instance ensuring enough beds for the number 
of patients anticipated).
126	 Global Health Cluster and WHO (2018), Working Paper for Considering Cash Transfer Programming for Health in 
Humanitarian Contexts, 2018 (http://www.who.int/health-cluster/about/work/task-teams/working-paper-cash-health-
humanitarian-contexts.pdf).
127	 UNHCR, Ensuring Access to Health Care: Operational Guidance on Refugee Protection and Solutions in Urban Areas 
(Geneva: UNHCR, 2011) ( https://cms.emergency.unhcr.org/documents/11982/39268/UNHCR%2C+Operational+guidan
ce+on+refugee+protection+and+solutions+in+urban+areas+%E2%80%93+Ensuring+access+to+health+care/300ef365-
188c-4b34-aa32-c00a387ee098), p. 3.
128	 UNHCR, Designing Appropriate Interventions in Urban Settings: Health, Education, Livelihoods, and Registration for 
Urban Refugees and Returnees (Geneva: UNHCR, 2009) (https://www.unhcr.org/4b2789779.pdf).


===== PAGE 237 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    227
•	
Distance to the nearest healthcare facilities.
•	
Financial and legal constraints on accessing health services, including not being 
registered with UNHCR or not having legal identification documents in the host 
country.
•	
Cultural and religious sensitivity. This might, for example, mean ensuring separate 
facilities for female patients and enough female providers for exams.
•	
Giving thought to possible tensions between host and displaced communities with 
regard to healthcare provision and access, for example overwhelming already 
burdened facilities with additional patients.
•	
Primary health care (PHC) and emergency health services need to be free of charge 
in the initial emergency phase (while taking care not to undermine pre-existing 
medical payment systems after an emergency).
•	
Refugees from middle-income countries – as in the Syrian crisis – may be older 
than is typical for refugee populations elsewhere, and may present with chronic 
diseases. 
•	
Urban refugees need to be integrated into existing health services.  
•	
Avoid creating parallel health structures.
•	
Urban refugees need to be connected to food and nutrition programmes and the 
other basics that underlie good health.
•	
Monitoring urban refugees’ health needs and how they are being met can be 
problematic given the ‘hidden’ nature of urban life, and many people may use more 
than one health provider. This makes arriving at meaningful data on morbidity within 
urban refugee populations difficult.
For a discussion on meeting the maternal and newborn health needs of displaced people 
see the Wilson Center’s Maternal Health Initiative (https://www.wilsoncenter.org/event/
humanitarian-response-urban-settings-meeting-the-maternal-and-newborn-health-
needs-displaced). See also UNICEF and Save the Children, Newborn Health in Humanitarian 
Settings (New York: UNICEF Programme Division, 2016) (http://www.unicefinemergencies.
com/downloads/eresource/docs/Health/NewBornHealthBook-ProductionV17-Web.pdf).
For a discussion of refugee mental health needs in urban areas in Jordan, see MSF, ‘The 
Less Visible Humanitarian Crisis: Refugee Mental Health Needs in Urban Jordan’, 17 October 
2018 (https://www.msf.org/mental-health-needs-refugees-urban-jordan). These issues are 
also discussed in D. J. H. te Lintelo and E. Soye, ‘Urban Wellbeing, Mental Health and the 
Syrian Refugee Crisis’, IDS Opinion, 9 October 2017 (https://www.ids.ac.uk/opinions/urban-
wellbeing-mental-health-and-the-syrian-refugee-crisis/).


===== PAGE 238 =====
228    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
In summary, health provision in urban emergencies is complex, with varying timeframes 
ranging from life-saving action to longer-term provision and care, such as for mental health 
needs. In protracted emergencies, engaging in healthcare systems is vital, recognising the 
multi-sectoral, multifaceted and interlinked nature of healthcare provision. 
4.9 Food security
According to the 2018 State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World report, in 2017 821 
million people were undernourished and, after several years of decline, global hunger has 
been on the increase since 2014 (mostly in South America and Africa). The report also noted 
that nearly 500 million of the most hungry people live in conflict-affected countries.129
This Good Practice Review found considerable information concerning general food security 
(such as stunting, obesity and child malnutrition), food security operations in rural areas and 
urban food security in chronic poverty settings, links to which are provided at the end of this 
section. However, there is relatively little information specifically relating to food security 
in urban emergencies (with notable exceptions, which are presented here). Information 
on good practice often relates food security to other sectoral approaches, in particular 
livelihoods and cash and markets (discussed below, as well as in Sections 4.5 and 3.3). 
This section introduces food security. It presents good practice relating to disasters and 
conflict. The section ends with a list of websites and further reading on urban food security. 
As well as livelihoods and cash and markets, this section relates closely to Section 4.8 on 
health and Section 3.6 on assessments.
4.9.1 Food in cities
Food security broadly refers to being able to obtain enough food to lead a healthy and 
productive life. According to the Sphere Handbook, ‘Undernutrition reduces people’s ability 
to recover after a crisis. It impairs cognitive functions, reduces immunity to disease, increases 
susceptibility to chronic illness, limits livelihoods opportunities and reduces the ability to 
engage within the community. It undermines resilience and may increase dependence on 
ongoing support’.130
Food security closely links to other urban challenges and issues. As the 2018 State of Food 
Security and Nutrition in the World report notes: ‘In addition to conflict, climate variability 
129	 FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2018: Building Climate 
Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition (Rome, FAO, 2018) (http://www.fao.org/state-of-food-security-nutrition/en/).
130	 Sphere Project, Sphere Handbook: Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Humanitarian Response, 2018 
(http://www.sphereproject.org/), p. 160.


===== PAGE 239 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    229
and extremes are among the key drivers behind the recent uptick in global hunger and one 
of the leading causes of severe food crises. The cumulative effect of changes in climate is 
undermining all dimensions of food security – food availability, access, utilization and 
stability’.131 Food shortages in cities can also lead to social unrest and inflation.132 
In urban areas, information on malnutrition might be limited. One study notes that ‘the 
figures that are available mask pronounced inequalities within cities. Within apparently 
prosperous city centres, in huge slums or in condemned housing blocks, rates of malnutrition 
and infant mortality may be higher than they are in rural areas’.133 Consumption patterns 
may also differ between rural and urban areas, for instance people eating out of the home 
at street markets. An additional well-documented urban phenomenon is increasing levels of 
obesity, in both low- and middle-income countries. Recent research indicates that obesity is 
especially an issue among women.134 
4.9.2 Urban food security in disasters
The Sphere Handbook’s 2018 urban revision gives extensive information on food security 
and nutrition, which is generally applicable in urban areas. Key lessons following disasters 
include:
Use cash. Cash is often a preferred mechanism for improving food security. WFP states that 
‘If deployed in the right context, [cash] can improve access to food, contribute to more 
consistent consumption patterns and diversified diets as well as reduce negative coping 
strategies such as selling valuable production assets to buy food’.135 According to CaLP, 
131	 FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2018, p. xii.
132	 For a discussion, see P. Bonnard, Assessing Urban Food Security: Adjusting the FEWS Rural Vulnerability Assessment 
Framework to Urban Environments, USAID FEWS Project, 2000 (https://www.alnap.org/system/files/content/resource/
files/main/pnacj249.pdf).
133	 Identification of Vulnerable People in Urban Environments Assessment of Sustainable Livelihoods and Urban 
Vulnerabilities, ACF, 2010 (https://fscluster.org/sites/default/files/documents/ACF%20-Identificationof%20
Vulnerable%20People%20inUrban%20Environments.pdf), p. 7.
134	 See for example D. Amugsi et al., ‘Prevalence and Time Trends in Overweight and Obesity among Urban Women: 
An Analysis of Demographic and Health Surveys data from 24 African Countries, 1991–2014, BMJOpen, 2017 
(https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/7/10/e017344). The research concluded that ‘Overweight and obesity are 
increasing among women of reproductive age in urban Africa, with obesity among this age group having more than 
doubled or tripled in 12 of the 24 countries. There is an urgent need for deliberate policies and interventions to 
encourage active lifestyles and healthy eating behaviour to curb this trend in urban Africa’.  
135	 WFP, Cash-based Transfers for Delivering Food Assistance (Rome: WFP, 2017) (https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/
groups/public/documents/communications/wfp284171.pdf?_ga=2.31747838.1528048293.1537155400-
478162095.1537155400). While increasing access to food, it should be noted that this in itself may not lead to nutrition 
security, where markets may comprise highly processed cheap high caloric foods (lots of sugar and fat) with limited 
nutritional value, or foodstuffs made from poor quality raw materials.


===== PAGE 240 =====
230    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
‘In general, smaller and more frequent cash grants will be spent on food, whereas larger 
one-time payments will be used for establishing livelihoods or replacing assets’. However, 
households may also use large grants ‘to buy staples in bulk, achieving increased value for 
money but less diversity in the diet’.136
For further information see WFP, Cash-based Transfers for Delivering Food Assistance, April 2017 
(https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/communications/wfp284171.
pdf?_ga=2.31747838.1528048293.1537155400-478162095.1537155400).
See also an ALNAP webinar, ‘Cash in the City:  Addressing Food Security Needs in 
Urban Crises’, 9 December 2016 (https://www.alnap.org/upcoming-events/cash-in-the-city-
addressing-food-security-needs-in-urban-crises-urban-webinar-15).
Use existing markets. In Haiti, several agencies worked with street vendors immediately 
after the earthquake to provide food to affected people.137 Using existing markets can also 
prevent unfair competition from external food suppliers. One assessment by WFP after the 
Kashmir earthquake in 2005 concluded that urban food distributions would damage existing 
markets.138 Using markets necessitates a market analysis, discussed in Section 3.3. The 
example from Jakarta in Box 4.24 describes the benefits of using existing markets.
Take a multisectoral approach. Access to food can be increased through both cash and 
livelihoods programmes. One example of this is Oxfam’s Emergency Food Security and 
Livelihoods (EFSL) approach, which links food security with livelihoods. A review of three 
Oxfam programmes (in Gaza, Haiti and Nairobi) responding to urban conflict and disaster 
situations found that combining these approaches is effective. In Port-au-Prince, the 
evaluation found that ‘The EFSL component contributed to the economic recovery in Port-
au-Prince and an improved food security situation through inputs for the rehabilitation 
of livelihoods of earthquake-affected communities. It provided emergency food and 
livelihoods-recovery support to approximately 195,000 beneficiaries outside camps, 
successfully targeting the very poor, the poor, and small community-level business-
owners who had lost most or all of their assets’.139 WFP’s ‘essential needs’ approach 
uses a multi-sectoral lens to understand vulnerability in urban settings, helping to ‘de-
136	 T. Cross and A. Johnston, Cash Transfer Programming in Urban Emergencies: A Toolkit for Practitioners, CaLP, 2011 
(http://www.urban-response.org/resource/7056), p. xix.
137	 C. Clermont et al., Urban Disasters: Lessons from Haiti. Study of Member Agencies’ Responses to the Earthquake in 
Port au Prince, Haiti, January 2010 (London: Disasters Emergency Committee, 2011).
138	 S. Sivakumaran, Market Analysis in Emergencies, CaLP, 2011 (http://www.cashlearning.org/downloads/resources/
calp/CaLP_Market_Assessments.pdf).
139	 See I. Macauslan with L. Phelps, Oxfam GB Emergency Food Security and Livelihoods Urban Programme Evaluation 
(Oxford: Oxfam GB, 2012) (http://www.cashlearning.org/downloads/EFSL_Report_forweb.pdf), p. 6.


===== PAGE 241 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    231
structure the multi-layered and multi-dimensional complexity of elements associated 
to vulnerability through a thorough socio-economic and demographic investigation’.140 
See: WFP, Urban Essential Needs Assessment in the Five Communes of Kimbanseke, Kinsenso, 
Makala, N’sele and Selembao (Kinshasa), September 2018 (https://docs.wfp.org/api/
documents/WFP-0000099888/download/?iframe); and WFP, Essential Needs Assessment 
Interim Guidance Note, July 2018 (https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/WFP-0000074197/
download/?_ga=2.144102577.565257219.1551103668-1509403955.1526301645).
For further reading, see I. Macauslan with L. Phelps, Oxfam GB Emergency Food Security and 
Livelihoods Urban Programme Evaluation (Oxford: Oxfam GB, 2012) (http://www.cashlearning.
org/downloads/EFSL_Report_forweb.pdf).
4.9.3 Food security in conflict
FAO and WFP identify four ‘pillars’ of food security: availability, access, utilisation and 
stability, which ‘refers to the fact that all three must be maintained consistently. Conflict 
undermines all these pillars in many, and often interlinked, ways’.141 One urban food 
assessment in Juba found that ‘Urban households, for example, are particularly vulnerable to 
140	 WFP, Essential Needs Assessment Interim Guidance Note, July 2018 (https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/WFP-
0000074197/download/?_ga=2.144102577.565257219.1551103668-1509403955.1526301645), p. 10.
141	 FAO/WFP, Monitoring Food Security in Countries with Conflict Situations: A Joint FAO/WFP Update for the United 
Nations Security Council, January 2018 (http://www.fao.org/3/I8386EN/i8386en.pdf), p. iii.
Box 4.24  Food security in Jakarta during the 1997–98 El Niño
‘In Jakarta, Indonesia, as food security came under pressure from drought and reduced 
rice production during the 1997/98 El Nino event, a novel programme was established 
to use commercial markets for aid delivery. Imported wheat was milled into flour by 
Indonesian flour mills, and Indonesian companies produced pre-packaged noodles, 
providing jobs for some of those recently made unemployed in the city. In addition 
the noodles could also be used by street-side cafes, ensuring that small food traders 
and vendors were not adversely affected by the provision of food aid. The programme 
worked because it allowed each level in the production/delivery chain to make a profit 
while maintaining incentives and penalties based on performance.’
Source: D. Sanderson and P. Knox-Clarke, Responding to Urban Disasters: Learning from Previous Relief and Recovery 
Operations (London: ALNAP/ODI, 2012) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/responding-to-urban-disasters-learning-
from-previous-relief-and-recovery-operations), p. 9.


===== PAGE 242 =====
232    |    Humanitarian response in urban contexts
inflation, food price increases, basic non-food price increases, exchange rate/depreciation, 
policies and regulations, unemployment, crime, illness/death, diseases including HIV/AIDS 
and epidemics, separation/divorce, general economic decline, conflicts and population 
influx, and natural disasters’.142 In Gaza, Oxfam’s EFSL programme responded to increased 
food insecurity exacerbated by the Israeli military occupation during 2008–2009 with cash 
(including vouchers and cash for work) and training for income generation. 
Food security in conflict can be greatly affected, and controlled by, a multiplicity of factors, 
as the extract in Box 4.25 on Syria illustrates.
For a summary of food security in 17 countries affected by conflict, see FAO/WFP, Monitoring 
Food Security in Countries with Conflict Situations: A Joint FAO/WFP Update for the United 
Nations Security Council, January 2018 (http://www.fao.org/3/I8386EN/i8386en.pdf).
For a description of the urban food security crisis in Somalia in 2009, and its impact on markets 
and prices, see C. Holleman and G. Moloney, ‘Somalia’s Growing Urban Food Security Crisis’, 
Humanitarian Exchange 42, March 2009 (https://odihpn.org/magazine/somalia%C2%92s-
growing-urban-food-security-crisis/). See also examples from WFP Lebanon of food insecurity 
market assessments (http://vam.wfp.org/CountryPage_assessments.aspx?iso3=LBN).
142	 National Bureau of Statistics, Juba Urban Food Security and Nutrition Assessment. A collaborative activity of the 
National Bureau of Statistics with support from FAO, UNICEF, WFP and Juba Administrative Authorities, 2015).
Box 4.25  Food security in Syria
‘Overall, trade remains hampered by insecurity. Localized mines and improvised explosive 
device contamination affect supply routes, which, along with reduced food availability, 
creates high and highly variable food prices. In addition, the removal of subsidies on 
certain goods, high inflation rates, lack of employment opportunities and income sources 
have substantially reduced households’ purchasing power. However, some trade routes 
have recently reopened such as those linking Damascus to other urban markets in the 
governorates of Aleppo, Al Hasakeh, and Deir-Ez-Zor. As a result, in October 2017 prices of 
a standard WFP food basket in some markets of Aleppo, Al Hasakeh and Rural Damascus 
were 12 to 35 percent lower than their yearly levels. Cereal import requirements are 
expected to continue to increase for the 2017/18 marketing year (17 percent compared with 
the previous year) due to below-average domestic production.’
Extract from FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2017: Building 
Resilience for Peace and Food Security (Rome: WFP, 2017), p. 35.


===== PAGE 243 =====
Chapter 4
Sectoral responses    |    233
Useful resources
The Food Security and Livelihoods in Urban Settings Working Group’s website provides a 
number of useful reports concerning urbanisation and food security (https://fscluster.org/
food-security-and-livelihoods-urban/workinggroup/food-security-and-livelihoods-urban).
A number of tools exist derived from a developmental understanding of food security. For 
example, the Household Economy Approach guidelines include a section on adapting tools 
to urban use (http://www.heawebsite.org/about-household-economy-approach). The 
guidelines also provide examples of urban assessment criteria to monitor food security, as 
well as expenditure and income patterns.
Identification of Vulnerable People in Urban Environments Assessment of Sustainable Livelihoods 
and Urban Vulnerabilities, ACF, 2010 (https://fscluster.org/sites/default/files/documents/
ACF%20-Identificationof%20Vulnerable%20People%20inUrban%20Environments.pdf).
The African Food Security Urban Network (AFSUN) (http://www.afsun.org/).
The Global Food Security and Cluster and World Food Programme’s 2015 report Tracking 
the Development of Urban Food Security Assessment Tools: 2010 to 2015 provides a desk 
review of urban food security assessment tools (https://fscluster.org/sites/default/
files/documents/gFSC-WFP%20Adapting%20to%20an%20Urban%20World%20-%20
Revised%20DESK%20REVIEW_June%202015.pdf).
Emergency Nutrition Network, Field Exchange: Special Focus on Urban Food Security and 
Nutrition 46, September 2013 (http://files.ennonline.net/attachments/1613/fx-46-web.pdf).
Food Security Cluster (http://foodsecuritycluster.net/).
Hungry Cities Partnership (http://hungrycities.net/).
A desktop study of urban triggers and targeting relating to urban food security can be 
found in Oxford Policy Management, Food Security Urban Triggers and Targeting (Oxford: 
OPM, 2012) (https://www.alnap.org/help-library/review-of-urban-food-security-targeting-
methodology-and-emergency-triggers-final-report).
C. Skinner and G. Haysom, The Informal Sector’s Role in Food Security: A Missing Link in 
Policy Debates?, Discussion Paper No 6, March 2017 (http://hungrycities.net/wp-content/
uploads/2017/03/HCP6.pdf).
WFP’s reports concerning urban food insecurity can be found at https://www.wfp.org/news/
urban-food-insecurity-1871.
World Food Programme and urban safety nets: https://www.wfp.org/content/wfp-and-urban-
safety-nets.


===== PAGE 244 =====
Humanitarian
Practice Network

