
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
FACTSHEET – UNHCR SYRIA 
 
 
 
 
www.unhcr.org/sy 
1
Area-Based Programming and 
Humanitarian Early Recovery 
April 2024 
 
The Syria crisis is now in its 
fourteenth 
year. 
The 
UN 
estimates that 16.7 million people 
need 
humanitarian 
assistance 
across the country. While the 
security situation in some parts of 
the country is unpredictable, the 
economic deterioration is pushing 
more 
people 
into 
poverty
especially after the 2023 February 
earthquakes. 
Access to basic services and 
livelihoods is limited. Syrians are
increasingly unable to cope and
meet their basic needs. The UN 
estimates that 85% of households 
are unable to meet basic needs, and 
an estimated 15.4 million people – 
more than 65 per cent of the Syrian 
population - is food insecure. (2024 
Humanitarian Needs Overview) 
UNHCR 
provides 
protection 
services and assistance to refugees, 
asylum-seekers, internally displaced 
people (IDPs), returnees, stateless 
people 
and 
host 
community 
members based on their identified 
needs and vulnerabilities. In line 
with UN and donor policy, UNHCR
has responded by expanding its 
humanitarian 
early 
recovery 
activities.  
 
 
KEY FIGURES  
POPULATION OF CONCERN 
85% of households  
are unable to meet basic needs* 
 
* Source: 2024 HNO 
** Source: OCHA, January-July 2023 
***Source: UNHCR verified returns in 2024 
**** Source: UNHCR, March 2024 
75% of people  
in need of assistance are women and children*   
100%  
Inflation rate in Syria since February 2023* 
 
*Source: 2024 HNO 
7.2M
155,325
6,240 
17,333
Internally displaced people*
IDP returnees**
Refugee returnees ***
Refugees & asylum-
seekers****

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
FACTSHEET / AREA-BASED PROGRAMMING & HUMANITARIAN EARLY RECOVERY 
 
 
www.unhcr.org/sy 
2
Area-Based Programming 
 
UNHCR is committed to working with all forcibly 
displaced and stateless persons and to promoting the 
socio-economic inclusion of people under its mandate. 
In line with these commitments, and in partnership with 
other 
agencies, 
UNHCR 
seeks 
to 
maximize 
opportunities 
to 
respond 
through 
area-based 
approaches and integrated programming that are 
inclusive of all relevant population groups in a given 
operational context. This includes situations where 
vulnerable populations live together (e.g., IDPs, 
refugees and asylum-seekers from other countries, 
returning refugees and IDPs), and/or with host 
communities.  
 
As outlined in UNHCR’s Policy on Engagement in Situations of Internal Displacement, area-
based approaches and integrated programming aim to leverage opportunities and resources 
available to UNHCR and partners to advance protection and solutions in a manner that builds 
on and promotes local systems, including the capacities, knowledge, and resources of local 
communities, using a bottom-up and participatory age, gender and diversity-sensitive 
approach.  
 
UNHCR programmes are aligned with the objectives developed with the UN and Humanitarian 
Country Teams and are informed by joint assessments and analysis and joint programming. 
UNHCR’s programming and resource allocation are directed towards the greatest needs and 
risks while taking into account relevant inter-agency arrangements. 
 
Key characteristics of area-based programming 
▪ 
Implemented within a 
defined geographic area 
▪ 
Developed to target 
communities rather than 
specific population 
groups 
▪ 
Conceived in a 
community-driven and 
participatory manner 
▪ 
Based on inter-agency 
needs assessments,  
joint analysis and joint 
programming  
▪ 
Involves interventions 
across multiple 
sectors  
▪ 
Brings on board 
multiple stakeholders 
with comparative 
advantages 
 
Area-based programming in Syria  
UNHCR Syria’s strategic directions are aligned with the overall priorities of the UN in Syria and 
with the UN Strategic Framework for the Syrian Arab Republic 2022-2025. UNHCR identifies 
areas of interventions based on joint inter-agency needs assessments, for example, the Multi-
Sector Needs Assessment, which informs the Syria Humanitarian Needs Overview and 
Humanitarian Response Plan.  
 
One of UNHCR’s strategic directions for 2023-2025 is to foster an environment for voluntary, 
dignified, safe and sustainable return of IDPs focusing on supporting those who have returned 
spontaneously and their communities. This objective is pursued both through UNHCR's 
interventions as well as through various inter-agency area-based efforts. Refugees who have 
exercised their right to return – either voluntarily or otherwise – may also benefit from these 
interventions. 
UNHCR 
defines 
area-based 
programming 
as 
a 
multi-
stakeholder and multi-sectoral 
approach that responds to the 
interrelated 
needs 
of 
all 
population groups living in a 
defined geographic area.  
 
(Source: Policy on UNHCR’s Engagement in 
Situations of Internal Displacement) 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
 
 
FACTSHEET / AREA-BASED PROGRAMMING & HUMANITARIAN EARLY RECOVERY 
 
 
www.unhcr.org/sy 
3
In Syria, UNHCR leads the Protection and Community Services, and Shelter and Non-Food 
Item sectors and participates in joint multi-sector needs assessments with UN agencies and 
other international and national partners. Needs are assessed for each sector based on specific 
criteria and defined priorities. Such criteria may include availability of basic services, local 
markets and accessibility, among others. Area Humanitarian Country Teams help define the 
most vulnerable geographic areas across all the sectors, in consultation with sector focal points 
in Damascus, to inform planning and response. 
 
At the inter-agency level, UNHCR actively steers and informs efforts to strengthen support for 
communities with high needs that are experiencing higher levels of return, through its roles as 
a co-convenor of Pillar III of the UN Strategic Framework “Enabling environment for a resilient 
return” together with UNRWA; as the secretariat for the Syria Return and Reintegration 
Working Group (RRWG) that is chaired by the UN Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator; and, 
together with UNDP, as co-chair of the RRWG’s Technical Working Group. 
 
Community-based protection 
In line with UNHCR’s community-based and area-based approach, UNHCR supports 117 
community and 116 mobile units in all 14 governorates in Syria and engages over 2,500 
outreach volunteers to strengthen its protection activities. For more information on protection 
services offered at UNHCR-supported community centres, please refer to the UNHCR Syria 
Factsheet.  
Community centres offer protection services based on identified needs in underserved or 
remote locations. The latter respond flexibly to population movements and increase outreach 
to the most vulnerable populations who do not have easy access to the community centres. 
Community centres are supported by a network of outreach volunteers who are selected from 
the IDP and affected communities. They are the first responders and assist those in need in a 
timely manner. They inform communities of the services available, identify needs, provide 
initial support and refer cases to community centres for further assistance. 
 
UNHCR’s community-based approach adheres to the accountability towards the affected 
populations frameworks which places people at the centre of programme development, for 
example 
during 
assessments, 
in 
the 
design 
of 
projects/activities 
and 
during 
feedback/monitoring of these projects/activities. Participation is also enabled through 
outreach volunteers who not only identify common problems in communities but also facilitate 
conversations on how to address these. The information provided by outreach volunteers is 
analysed and helps define UNHCR’s response. 
 
Area-based return support  
In late 2021, the RRWG endorsed the “area-based return support” approach: an organizing 
framework in which UN agencies, INGOs and their partners seek to align, systematize and 
strengthen coordination in multi-sectoral interventions aimed at addressing the immediate 
needs of communities receiving returnees in a particular geographical area while promoting 
humanitarian early recovery and resilience, and accordingly the sustainability of return and 
reintegration. Context sensitivity and protection risk analysis are at the core of the approach, 
aiming to avoid exacerbating local conflict dynamics and mitigating risks while strengthening 
opportunities, capacities, and linkages. 
The area-based return approach is “context-specific”, and “people-driven” in that it “follows” 
returnees who have already exercised their right to return to the communities that are 
receiving them, reaffirming the principles of high-level UN initiatives such as the New York 
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants and employing bottom-up community-level 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
FACTSHEET / AREA-BASED PROGRAMMING & HUMANITARIAN EARLY RECOVERY 
 
 
www.unhcr.org/sy 
4
participation and inclusive approach to agree on priorities for collective outcomes identified 
by the same affected communities. This is crucial for the delivery of effective and accountable 
support since no single agency, organization or sector can on their own address the challenges 
facing communities experiencing returns with high levels of need. Moreover, after fourteen 
years of humanitarian crisis, communities are demanding to be involved in defining their own 
priorities and mapping out local solutions for a more sustainable and self-reliant path to early 
recovery. 
 
Driven by Area Humanitarian Country Teams across Syria, humanitarian activities under the 
area-based return support approach have been advanced in seven different governorates thus 
far: 
 
Humanitarian Early Recovery  
UNHCR’s support for humanitarian early recovery efforts in Syria includes interventions 
related to cash-based interventions, shelter and re-establishing lifesaving services, livelihoods, 
technical capacity building and community resilience.  
 
▪ 
Cash-based interventions (CBIs): These are interventions in which cash or vouchers for 
goods or services are provided to forcibly displaced persons on an individual or community 
basis. Most forcibly displaced populations have access to markets and services and can 
thereby benefit from CBI. UNHCR’s CBI programme for refugees in Syria has been in place 
since 2007. UNHCR has been expanding this programme to include IDPs and returnees 
Humanitarian early recovery is a form of humanitarian assistance that aims to reduce 
immediate and protracted humanitarian needs by strengthening the self-reliance of 
affected populations, primarily focused at the household level.  

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
 
 
FACTSHEET / AREA-BASED PROGRAMMING & HUMANITARIAN EARLY RECOVERY 
 
 
www.unhcr.org/sy 
5
since 2021, monetizing the existing in-kind assistance on a limited scale. The earthquakes 
in February 2023 accelerated UNHCR’s efforts to provide CBI to vulnerable Syrians, 
through different CBI modalities, such as multi-purpose cash assistance (MPCA) and cash 
for minor repairs. 
 
▪ 
Shelter & basic services: Shelter and support to basic services projects focus on areas with 
the highest needs, including where spontaneous returns of IDPs are taking place. UNHCR 
adopts a multi-sectoral area-based approach to support access to shelter and basic services 
in areas where needs are the highest to enable dignified returns. Minor shelter repairs 
target the most vulnerable families to ensure basic conditions and safety. Activities include 
the installation of doors, windows, toilets and kitchens. The repair of household-level 
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services focuses on neighbourhoods where minor 
shelter repairs are also being implemented to ensure homes are habitable. Minor repairs to 
schools, primary health care centres, markets, and individual farmer irrigation channels also 
support people who have spontaneously returned to settle down. Support for civil 
registries is a key protection intervention to facilitate access to civil documentation – a 
crucial means for vulnerable Syrians to have freedom of movement and access to services. 
 
▪ 
Livelihoods: UNHCR livelihoods support focuses on providing assistance to vulnerable 
people who are demonstrably skilled and wish to become engaged in particular key 
economic sectors. The start-up support for small businesses provides entrepreneurship 
training to selected beneficiaries followed by an in-kind contribution to their businesses. 
In addition, agricultural assets support provides agricultural-related inputs and services to 
farming households such as small livestock (including poultry, bees and sheep) and other 
ancillary inputs and supplies (including coops, hives, fodder and veterinary drugs). 
 
▪ 
Capacity building: Capacity building aims to support institutions to resume the provision 
of basic humanitarian services depending on the most urgent needs. For instance, following 
the COVID-19 pandemic, many of UNHCR’s capacity-building activities were related to 
health care and the provision of essential medical equipment. UNHCR also provides 
protection training to government counterparts and lawyers regularly in order to improve 
access to persons in need of protection services.  
 
▪ 
Community resilience: These activities aim to empower communities to build resilience in 
the face of shocks and adverse effects of the ongoing 14-year crisis, as well as from the 
shocks from the February 2023 earthquakes. Community health volunteers help increase 
health awareness and in turn, reduce health risks in communities. The support for 
community-led initiatives, youth-led initiatives, and community-based organizations helps 
build up community leadership. These initiatives can include for example organizing 
knitting skills trainings for internally displaced women, installing solar streetlights, 
providing mental health and psychosocial support services to older people and organizing 
skills development activities for children, amongst others. Efforts to support community 
resilience after the earthquakes included supporting households to cope with adverse 
economic shocks by providing cash support for multi-purpose needs, shelter solutions 
comprising cash for minor repair and cash for rent, and the rehabilitation of key 
infrastructure works for facilities that are used by the community. 
 
 
 
 
Further information 
UNHCR Syria Global Focus page | UNHCR Syria website | UNHCR Syria Data Portal | UNHCR Syria Factsheet
Contact  
For further information, please contact: UNHCR Syria External Relations Unit, Email: 
SYRDAREPORTING@unhcr.org  
